### Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

# **Fuel**

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/fuel

# Full Length Article

Ling-zhi Bao <sup>a</sup>, Bai-gang Sun <sup>a</sup>, Qing-he Luo <sup>a,\*</sup>, Jin-cheng Li <sup>b,\*</sup>, Ding-chao Qian <sup>b</sup>, He-yang Ma <sup>b</sup>, Ying-jun Guo <sup>b</sup>

- <sup>a</sup> School of Mechanical Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China
- <sup>b</sup> General Research and Development Institute, China First Auto Works Corporation Limited, Changchun 130013, China

## ARTICLE INFO

Keywords:
Direct-injection hydrogen engine
Turbocharged
High thermal efficiency
NOx emissions control

#### ABSTRACT

Hydrogen, as clean and renewable energy, is an ideal fuel for internal combustion engines. The direct-injection (DI) hydrogen engine can offer large power with low cost and rely less on hydrogen purity. In this study, a 2.0L DI turbocharged hydrogen engine is implemented to achieve clean, efficient, and high-power performance. Peak power of 120 kW @ 4400 rpm and a maximum torque of 340 N·m @ 2000 rpm can be achieved with the matched turbocharger. Appropriate retarded injection can suppress abnormal combustion and broaden the dynamic boundaries. A maximum brake thermal efficiency (BTE) of 42.6% is obtained with the slightly lean excess air coefficient ( $\lambda$ ) of 1.91 @ 2000 rpm and 40.4% BTE with the  $\lambda$  of 2.47 @ 3000 rpm. The high conversion efficiency of NOx emissions of over 99.5% is reached at low speeds (below 2000 rpm) and drops to 90% at 4400 rpm with the use of the NH<sub>3</sub>-SCR after-treatment system. The NOx emissions of approximately two-thirds of the whole working conditions can be reduced below 20 ppm. The optimized DI hydrogen engine can achieve large power (Brake mean effective pressure = 17 bar), high efficiency (Brake thermal efficiency = 42.1%), and near-zero emissions (NOx < 20 ppm) simultaneously.

### 1. Introduction

Global warming and climate change are two of the main drivers for the development of sustainable and renewable transportation solutions. In recent decades, several governments have committed to achieving peak carbon dioxide emissions and carbon neutrality. As a result, low-carbon or carbon-free energy must be implemented. Hydrogen, as clean and renewable energy, is regarded as an important component of the energy structure in the future [1]. Currently, there are two techniques for vehicle application: the first is hydrogen fuel cells, with zero emissions and high efficiency. The second alternative is the hydrogen internal combustion engine. It can make use of existing established industries with low cost and high reliability, relying less on the purity of hydrogen fuel [2].

The high heat value, large octane number, and wide flame limits prove that hydrogen is regarded as an ideal fuel for the internal combustion engine [3]. The low ignition energy and high autoignition temperature of hydrogen indicate that it is suitable to be spark ignited. According to the mixture formation types, the hydrogen engines can be

divided into port fuel injection (PFI) and direct injection (DI) hydrogen engines [4]. In terms of the PFI, the hydrogen takes up approximately 30% of the cylinder volume when mixing with air in the intake stroke at a stoichiometric ratio due to the ultra-low density of the hydrogen [5]. Thus, about 30% of the power is lost with PFI, while the DI hydrogen engines solve this problem. The mixture calorific value of the DI hydrogen engine reaches  $4.5 \, \text{MJ/m}^3$ , providing 17% more power than the gasoline engine(3.9  $\, \text{MJ/m}^3$ ) with the same displacement in the theoretical analysis [6]. As demonstrated in Fig. 1 [7], DI turbocharged hydrogen engine is superior in power and torque density compared to other fuels.

Despite the strong performance of the power, the high flame speeds and the wide flame range of hydrogen lead to high combustion efficiency and low pumping loss [8]. Therefore, hydrogen engines can achieve higher thermal efficiency compared to other fuels. NOx emissions are considered the major pollutants from the hydrogen engine and can reach zero emissions with lean combustion [9]. However, there exists a trade-off relationship between the three parameters of NOx emissions, thermal efficiency, and power. Reducing the NOx emissions affects the thermal efficiency and sacrifices the power performance

E-mail addresses: luoqinghe@bit.edu.cn (Q.-h. Luo), lijincheng@faw.com.cn (J.-c. Li).

<sup>\*</sup> Corresponding authors.

<span id="page-1-0"></span>*Fuel 324 (2022) 124713 L.-z. Bao et al.* 

# **Nomenclature** PFI port fuel injection DI direct injection SOI start of injection SCR selective catalytic reduction OC oxidation Catalyst ASC ammonia slip catalyst BMEP brake mean effective pressure BTE brake thermal efficiency IMEP indicate mean effective pressure ECU electric control unit IVO intake valve opens EVC exhaust valve closes λ excess air coefficient

**Fig. 1.** Power and torque potentials of different engine concepts [\[7\]](#page-7-0).

## inevitably [\[10\].](#page-7-0)

A series of technological methods have been applied to balance the trade-off relationship and find the performance boundaries of the DI hydrogen engine. First, adjusting the injection strategy can optimize the mixing process in the cycle, resulting in high combustion efficiency. Wimmer et al. found that when the timing of the start of injection (SOI) was delayed from 120◦CA BTDC to 65◦CA BTDC, the distribution of the mixture in the cylinder was stratified, forming a local area of rich concentration, accelerating the propagation of flame and shortening the duration of combustion [\[11\]](#page-7-0). Meanwhile, hydrogen was injected at the end of compression, the compression work decreased and the overall efficiency increases by 3%. Verhelst et al. discovered that the stratified combustion of hydrogen can form a slightly rich mixture near the spark plug, ensuring stable flame development and propagation; while the leaner mixture is clustered near the wall surface to reduce heat transfer loss and achieve efficient combustion [\[12\]](#page-7-0). Second, intake boosting is an effective method of enhancing power and efficiency performance. Tsujimura et al. found when applying the intake boost pressure of 175 kPa and an exhaust gas recirculation rate of roughly 50% on a 1.3L supercharged hydrogen engine, a maximum indicate mean effective pressure (IMEP) of 1.46 MPa (135 N⋅m@1000 rpm) was achieved with engineout NOx emissions of *<*150 ppm (NOx *<* 0.55 g/kW) [\[13\].](#page-7-0) Oikawa et al. reported that near zero emissions were reached and the indicated thermal efficiency was approaching 50% with 9 bar IMEP @1000 rpm based on the 100 kPa supercharge pressure [\[14\]](#page-7-0). The high thermal efficiency of 50% and low NOx emissions were owing to the new

combustion process called the plume ignition combustion concept [\[15\]](#page-7-0). The peak brake thermal efficiency of the DI hydrogen engine can reach 45.1 % according to the simulation by Klepatz et al. [\[16\].](#page-7-0) Shiro Tanno et al. have declared that the indicated thermal efficiency of 55 % and the brake thermal efficiency of 51 % were the future targets by applying high efficiency turbocharger, low penetration injection, and proper combustion chamber configuration, and Atkinson cycle [\[17\]](#page-7-0). Third, the NOx emissions after-treatment system plays an important role to maintain high engine performance while controlling the emissions. Kawamura proposed a two-stage combined system of NOx Storage/ Reduction (NSR) and a Diesel Oxidation Catalyst (DOC), where unburned hydrogen is used to reduce NOx emissions in NSR. The DOC is responsible for oxidizing unreacted hydrogen and ammonia generated in the reduction process. Experimental results show that the NOx conversion efficiency can reach 98% and hydrogen consumption only increases by 0.2% to 0.5% [\[18\]](#page-7-0). Kufferath et al. tested the NH3-SCR system with lean combustion, the NOx conversion efficiency reached 90%. It is expected that the NOx emission of a DI hydrogen engine hybrid vehicle can be reduced to only 1 ~ 2 mg per kilometer [\[19\].](#page-7-0)

According to the articles reviewed above, the optimization of the engine performance mainly focuses on the specific working speeds and loads, with little consideration of the overall working characteristics. The working boundary and its limitations have not been clarified. Besides, the previous experiments are based on the naturally aspirated or supercharged method, with low and fixed intake pressure (below 200 kPa). Compared to the supercharger with the high cost and requires extra driven power, a compact turbocharger can achieve higher thermal efficiency since it can recycle exhaust energy. However, the commercial turbochargers of the traditional gasoline and diesel engine are no longer suited for hydrogen engines. The matching process is difficult and will be discussed later. Moreover, when the turbine cannot absorb enough exhaust gas energy, the residual gas fraction increases and the combustion deteriorates, which increases the controlling challenge [\[20\]](#page-7-0).

In this study, a maximum intake pressure of 280 kPa was achieved with the reconfigured turbocharger. The effects of the turbocharger and the limitation of abnormal combustion on the output power are investigated in detail. Various methods, such as lean combustion and the Miller cycle, are tested to reach maximum thermal efficiency. An NH3- SCR after-treatment is applied to achieve near-zero emissions with efficient and high-power performance.

## **2. Experimental set-up**

Experiments are implemented on a 2.0 L, four-stroke, direct injection hydrogen-fueled engine with 99.99% high purity hydrogen. The hydrogen engine is modified based on the original gasoline engine. The

**Fig. 2.** Sketch of the DI hydrogen engine. (1- First pressure reducing valve, 2- Secondary pressure reducing valve, 3- Hydrogen mass flow meter, 4- Exhaust gas analysis before the SCR after-treatment, 5-Injection system of the NH3, 6- Exhaust gas analysis after the SCR after-treatment).

schematic diagram is described in Fig. 2, with the engine parameters shown in Table 1.

As shown in Fig. 3, the direct-injection hydrogen injector was driven by the piezoelectric with 200 V voltage and a maximum current of 8 A. The hydrogen injector was placed on the intake side of the cylinder and a maximum flow rate of 2.66 mg/ms was achieved with the injection pressure of 14 MPa. The detailed spray characteristics of this wide-open direct-injection hydrogen injector were tested by Wang et al. [21]. A cover cap with a 2.6 mm  $\times$  0.5 mm rectangle hole was installed on the injector to gather the hydrogen jet and avoid the backflow during the injection. The injection duration was determined by the engine speeds, the hydrogen injection pressure, and the required mass flow according to the specific working conditions. The detailed injection durations were mainly clustered in the range of 3 ms to 10 ms.

Table 2 summarizes the uncertainties in the measuring data based on the equipment specifications. The engine's speed and torque were measured using a CW250 eddy current dynamometer. A two-stage pressure-reducing valve can adjust the hydrogen injection pressure from 4 MPa to 20 MPa depending on the working conditions. The cylinder pressure was measured using four Kistler cylinder pressure transducers 6052C, and the electric control unit (ECU) was based on the INCA system. Temperature (Pt100 and K type thermocouple), as well as the pressure of the intake and exhaust pipes, were all part of the data collection system.

The mass flow of hydrogen was monitored by Emerson CMF010 Coriolis mass flowmeters, and the mass flow of air was measured by a thermal mass flowmeter. The excess air coefficient (the reciprocal of the equivalence ratio) for each working condition is calculated by the measured mass flow of hydrogen and air in the test bench system. The NOx emission of the exhaust gases was measured by an AVL DiTEST GAS 1000 using the electrochemical method. The after-treatment system consists of a 2.1 L oxidation catalyst (OC), a 5.79 L selective catalytic reduction (SCR), and an ammonia slip catalyst (ASC). The solid ammonia is stored in the tank and is injected into the front of the SCR after heating. A rapid SCR mechanism is applied to achieve a high conversion efficiency of over 95%.

#### 3. Results and discussion

### 3.1. Enhancing the engine power

## 3.1.1. Increasing the output power by turbocharging

Intake boosting has become a common solution to increase the power density and improve the torque performance of the hydrogen engine. To investigate the effects of turbocharging, the engine works with the wide-open throttle to minimize the pumping loss. Hydrogen is supplied with a maximum safe working pressure of 14 MPa, ensuring sufficient injection duration at high engine speeds. The maximum power performance in experiments is mainly restricted by the limited flow rates of the hydrogen injector and the abnormal combustion, which will be discussed later. The tested results are shown in Fig. 3. The engine power rises smoothly, reaching its peak power of 51 kW with the naturally aspirated engine when the engine speed changes from 1000 rpm to 4500 rpm. In contrast, after the simulation, calculation, and reconfiguration of the turbocharger, the power of the turbocharged engine increased by

**Table 1**Parameters of the 2.0 L turbocharged direct-injection hydrogen engine.

|                             |         | , , , ,                             |
|-----------------------------|---------|-------------------------------------|
| Engine type                 |         | Hydrogen engine                     |
| Bore                        | 82.5 mm |                                     |
| Stroke                      |         | 93 mm                               |
| Cylinders                   |         | 4                                   |
| Compression ratio           |         | 12.5:1                              |
| Engine speed                |         | 1000 rpm $\sim$ 4500 rpm            |
| Hydrogen injection pressure |         | $6~\mathrm{MPa}\sim14~\mathrm{MPa}$ |
|                             |         |                                     |

123%, reaching a maximum power of 120 kW @ 4400 rpm. The torque performance is shown in Fig. 4. In comparison to the 112 N·m @ 2000 rpm with a naturally aspirated engine, the torque of the matched turbocharged engine increased by 195%, achieving a maximum torque of 340 N·m and a peak brake mean effective pressure (BMEP) of 21.2 bar at 2000 rpm. The high torque at low speeds can provide sufficient acceleration ability for the driven vehicle.

In terms of the results of the original gasoline engine turbocharger, only a 54% power increase is achieved, since the challenge of turbocharger matching for the DI hydrogen engines stands out. On the one hand, a more powerful compressor with larger air mass flow rates and a higher-pressure ratio is demanded for the hydrogen engine compared to gasoline engine. Because the high stoichiometric air-to-fuel ratio (34.25) and the lean combustion of the hydrogen engine ( $\lambda$  often exceeding 2) lead to the large air flow mass. As demonstrated in Fig. 5, the practical working area of a hydrogen engine takes up approximately twice that of gasoline engines. The majority of the working points are located in the compressor's high-efficiency region, and a maximum pressure ratio of 2.85 is achieved with 73% compressor efficiency. A large air flow rate range that covers from 0.03 kg/s to 0.17 kg/s is required for the hydrogen engine when the engine speeds change from 1000 rpm to 4500 rpm.

On the other hand, considering the low exhaust gas temperature of approximately 550 °C achieved at 3000 rpm with the power of 91 kW and the BMEP of 18.2 bar, while the exhaust temperature of a gasoline engine reaches 900 °C at the same load and engine speeds. Therefore, less energy can be recycled by the turbo of the hydrogen engine. Hence, a small turbo with a short flow diameter is required to raise the expansion ratio and provide sufficient power to the coaxial compressor. As shown in Fig. 6, the reduction of the turbo flow section leads to an increase in the exhaust pressure, especially at high engine speeds. The exhaust pressure rises rapidly from 121 kPa, exceeds the intake pressure at 2000 rpm, and arrives at 371 kPa at 3000 rpm, which is 110 kPa higher than the intake pressure. The volumetric efficiency, which evaluates the quantity of the gases exchanged, can be calculated as follows.

$$\emptyset = \frac{\frac{m_{air}}{30n}}{\frac{p_{intak_v}VM}{RT_{intak_v}}} \times 100\% \tag{1}$$

where  $m_{air}$  represents the air mass flow measured by the air flowmeters in the standard condition, kg/h; n represents the engine speeds, rpm;  $p_{intake}$  represents the absolute intake pressure of the intake manifold, kPa; V represents the displacement of the engine,  $m^3$ ; M equals to the mole mass of the air of 28.9 g/mol; R is the molar gas constant;  $T_{intake}$  represents the temperature of the intake manifold, K.

The volumetric efficiency varies with the change of the exhaust pressure and drops considerably from 97% to 78% at high speeds of 4500 rpm. The deterioration of the charging process increases the residual gases in the cylinder, causing abnormal combustion such as preignition and backfire, limiting the power performance. Hence, the torque of the turbocharged hydrogen engine in Fig. 4 drops significantly when the engine speeds exceed 3000 rpm. Besides, it also demonstrates that a single turbocharger cannot meet the demands of the entire engine speed range. Separate turbochargers suited for different ranges of engine speeds, or an appropriate variable geometry turbocharger are required to provide high intake pressure with large volumetric efficiency at whole engine speed range in the future.

#### 3.1.2. Abnormal combustion limits

Although the abnormal combustion of backfire can be avoided by retarding hydrogen injection after the intake valve closes, other abnormal combustion, such as the pre-ignition and the knock, still occurs under some specific working conditions. As shown in Fig. 7 (a), the injection pressure and engine speed are set at 14 MPa and 2000 rpm, respectively, while the timing of the start of injection (SOI) retards from  $-180\,^{\circ}\text{CA}$  (the negative sign represents the crank angle before the

<span id="page-3-0"></span>*Fuel 324 (2022) 124713 L.-z. Bao et al.* 

**Fig. 3.** Direct-injection hydrogen injector and the configuration of the combustion chamber.

**Table 2**  Measuring equipment and data accuracy.

| Measuring         | Device                   | Accuracy   |
|-------------------|--------------------------|------------|
| Engine speed      | GW250 dynamometer        | ±1 r/min   |
| Engine torque     | FC2000 Torque transducer | ±1N⋅m      |
| Cylinder pressure | Kistler 6052C transducer | ±0.2 bar   |
| H2 mass flow      | CMF010 H2 flowmeters     | ±0.01 kg/h |
| Air mass flow     | MTR-500 Air flowmeters   | ±2.5 kg/h  |
| NO emissions      | AVL DiTEST GAS 1000      | ±3 ppm     |

**Fig. 4.** Engine power performance with different intake types.

combustion top dead center) to − 140 ◦CA. The ignition of the spark plug takes place at − 8 ◦CA. The average cylinder pressure of 200 normal cycle tests without pre-ignition rises smoothly after ignition, peaking at 122 bar at 15 ◦CA. The pre-ignition happens during the NO.20 cycle of SOI = -180 ◦CA. The cylinder pressure increases drastically from − 25 ◦CA, premature to the spark timing, keeping fluctuation after reaching the maximum pressure of 182 bar at 2 ◦CA, accompanied by the sharp sound during the experiments. This phenomenon is induced by the hot spot in the cylinder due to the low ignition energy of hydrogen, and the mechanism is termed as the runway pre-ignition. The intense burning of the pre-ignition results in the rising of the cylinder temperature, causing the continuous generation of hot spots, triggering another pre-ignition at the NO.41cycle with an earlier start timing of − 30 ◦CA. The drastic pre-ignition also leads to the spontaneous combustion of the

**Fig. 5.** Engine torque performance with different intake types.

**Fig. 6.** Compressor map and the working area of the hydrogen engine and gasoline engine.

end mixture and a slight knock at the engine speed of 2000 rpm. Hence, the engine is forced to adjust the work conditions once the pre-ignition occurs, and the BMEP is limited to 15 bar with the SOI of-180 ◦CA. In

<span id="page-4-0"></span>*Fuel 324 (2022) 124713 L.-z. Bao et al.* 

**Fig. 7.** Intake exhaust pressure and volumetric efficiency at different engine speeds.

contrast, when the injection timing retards to − 160◦CA, the pre-ignition is alleviated. Because later injection leaves a long time for cooling before the injection, which inhibits the probability of the occurrence of preignition. However, pre-ignition also occurs with retarded injection when the engine works at high speeds with the same loads. As shown in Fig. 7(b), the pre-ignition cylinder pressure rises later at 3000 rpm, reaching a maximum of 171 bar without fluctuation. The increase of the turbulence intensity accelerates the flame speeds at 3000 rpm. The knock no longer occurs with the pre-ignition at high engine speeds. Considering the increase of the residual gases and the decrease of the mechanical efficiency, the cylinder pressure and temperature rise with the increase of the engine speed at the same loads. Thus, pre-ignition tends to take place at high engine speeds due to the high cylinder temperature.

Another abnormal combustion phenomenon of knock is also detected at an engine speed of 2000 rpm. As illustrated in Fig. 8(a), after the SOI delays to − 140 ◦CA, the BMEP can be improved to 19.5 bar, breaking through the pre-ignition limitation and occurring knock. Unlike the preignition, the cylinder pressure of the knock increases sharply after the ignition, reaching a peak pressure of 187 bar, which is 22 bar larger than the peak of the normal cycle. The rising rate of the pressure of the knock is larger than the pressure of the pre-ignition and leads to a louder and more shrill noise, with a higher thermal load of the engine. The thermal shock from high pressure gases and the vibration of the engine leaves

several pits and scratches on the cylinder wall and the head of the piston. As shown in Fig. 8 (b), the irreversible damage leads to a significant reduction in the working lifetime of the hydrogen engine. The effective method of prohibit knock is retarding ignition angle when the knock happens. However, the power and the thermal efficiency will decrease with delayed ignition.

To validate the maximum power boundary and investigate the abnormal combustion characteristic, different injection timings with various engine speeds are tested in Fig. 9. The overall BMEP increases with the retardation of the injection. It is worth noting that pre-ignition

**Fig. 9.** Cylinder pressure of abnormal combustion and its harm.

**Fig. 8.** Cylinder pressure of the pre-ignition combustion.

occurs at early injection timing (SOI = -180 ◦CA) and high engine speeds (*>*3000 rpm), whereas knock tends to happen with late injection (later than SOI = -160 ◦CA) and medium engine speeds. Apart from the adjustment of the injection timing, and reducing intake gas temperature after the intercooler, appropriate valve timing can also suppress abnormal combustion. Fig. 10. Fig. 11..

## *3.2. Increasing the brake thermal efficiency*

A larger compression ratio of 12.5 compared to the original gasoline engine of 10.8 is the basis of achieving high brake thermal efficiency (exceeds 42%). Here, other methods such as lean combustion and the Miller cycle are investigated as follows.

## *3.2.1. Effects of lean combustion*

As shown in Fig. 12, the working range of the excess air coefficient λ is confined between 1.7 and 3.8, considering the abnormal combustion with a rich ratio and the low operation stability with an ultra-lean ratio. The brake thermal efficiency (BTE) of both engine speeds rises first with the increase of the λ, keeps approximately constant when λ reaches 3, and drops significantly. While the BMEP shows a different tendency, it decreases rapidly with the λ changing from 1.7 to 2.9. Nevertheless, the range of BTE exceeds 40% overlaps with the area of BMEP *>* 8 bar, since the increase of the combustion efficiency and the turbocharger efficiency when the engine works at high loads. A maximum BTE of 42.6% can be obtained with λ of 1.91 @ 2000 rpm and a maximum BTE of 40.4% with λ of 2.47 @ 3000 rpm. Hence, slightly lean combustion benefits the engine by improving its thermal efficiency.

## *3.2.2. Effects of the Miller cycle*

The Miller cycle is an effective method for increasing thermal efficiency, as demonstrated by simulation in a turbocharged hydrogen engine [\[21\]](#page-7-0). As shown in Fig. 12, the negative sign represents the valve timing before the TDC. Both the intake and exhaust valves can be adjusted by 40 ◦CA. The highest BTE is located at the left bottom of the figure, where the intake valve opens (IVO) at − 20 ◦CA and the exhaust valve closes at the same time. Because early intake valve opening results in a decrease in the intake air, which drops from 427 kg/h with 10 ◦CA IVO to 391 kg/h with − 20 ◦CA IVO. The optimized EVC is also located at − 20 ◦CA since too early opening of the exhaust valve leads to the loss of the working capability while late exhaust valve timing affects the exhaust process. However, considering the high boost pressure of the hydrogen engine, the effects of the valve timing are relatively insignificant, with approximately 1.8% increase in the BTE after the

**Fig. 10.** Maximum BMEP can be achieved under the limitation of the abnormal combustion.

**Fig. 11.** Brake thermal efficiency and BMEP changes with excess air coefficient.

**Fig. 12.** Effects of the valve timing on the brake thermal efficiency.

## optimization.

The tested thermal efficiency is illustrated in Fig. 12, where the BTE of the hydrogen engine rises with the increase of power, keeping approximately 42% in the power section of 17 kW to 82 kW and dropping slightly to 35% at high power. The detailed statistics of the 120 kW hydrogen fuel cells come from the reports by Argonne National Laboratory [\[22\]](#page-7-0) and Eberle et al. [\[23\].](#page-7-0) Only the energy loss by the air compressor is calculated here in the thermal efficiency of the hydrogen fuel cells, as it rises rapidly, reaching a peak efficiency of 64% at 20% loads and dropping to approximately 40% at full loads. The indicated thermal efficiency also neglect the mechanical loss of the hydrogen engine, and can improve by approximately 5% thermal efficiency. The results shows that the efficiency of hydrogen engine can reach the same level as the hydrogen fuel cell in high power regions.

## *3.3. Achieving near-zero NOx emissions*

The methods of achieving original near-zero emissions (without any after-treatment) have been discussed in the previous investigation [\[24\]](#page-7-0). In this section, the function of commercial NH3-SCR after-treatment equipment is used to further control the NOx emissions of the hydrogen engines. The injection pressure is adjusted to 14 MPa and the SOI is advanced to-180 ◦CA, providing sufficient time for mixing. The target for the NOx emissions after the SCR system is set below 20 ppm. As shown in [Fig. 13\(](#page-6-0)a), low engine speeds (1500 rpm) result in a significant reduction of NOx emissions from 3010 ppm to 4 ppm, with over <span id="page-6-0"></span>L.-z. Bao et al. Fuel 324 (2022) 124713

**Fig. 13.** Thermal efficiency of the hydrogen engine and fuel cells changes with the power.

99.5% conversion efficiency. Approximately 1400 ppm can be disposed by the after-treatment system with an engine speed of 2500 rpm, while it declines drastically to 236 ppm at the engine speed of 4000 rpm. The maximum BMEP also decreases with the declination of the reduced ability of SCR treatment at high engine speed. The change in conversion efficiency is depicted in Fig. 13(b), where it remains>96% before the engine speed of 3000 rpm and drops significantly to 90% at 4400 rpm. The decrease of the conversion efficiency is related to the rise in the space velocity which represents the amount of the NOx emissions flowing through the unit volume of catalyst per hour. According to the mass conservation, the mass flow rates of the exhaust is equal to the sum of the airflow rates and hydrogen flow rates, and the space velocity can be calculated as below.

$$S = \frac{(m_{air} + m_{H_2})}{\rho_{max} V_{SCR}} \tag{2}$$

where S represents the space velocity,  $h^{-1}$ ;  $m_{H_2}$  represents the hydrogen flow rates;  $\rho_{exhaust}$  represents the density of the exhaust, kg/m³; and  $V_{SCR}$  represents the volume of the SCR, m³. Although the concentration of NOx emissions before the SCR decreases at high engine speed, the high-space velocity of over 60,000 is far beyond the working region of the commercial after-treatment system.

The overall working characteristics map and the performance of the

in-cylinder NOx control and the after-treatment are depicted in detail in Fig. 14. The efficient area (BTE > 40%) covers approximately half of the working conditions, with the highly efficient area (BTE > 42%) clustered in the high load exceeding 14 bar BEMP at the engine speed of 2500 rpm. The purple line represents the results of the in-cylinder NOx control, which occupied approximately half of the overall working map. The region of after-treatment NOx emissions below 20 ppm is extended notably when the engine speed changes from 1000 rpm to 2500 rpm, reaching the peak BTE of 42.1% @ 2000 rpm. In terms of the high-speed working conditions (exceeding 3000 rpm), only a limited increase in power is achieved due to the high-speed velocity. In general, a further step closer to the highest efficiency region (BTE > 42%) and larger power (BMEP > 14 bar) is achieved with near-zero emissions with the help of the NH3-SCR after-treatment system (see Fig. 15).

#### 4. Conclusion

The present study is implemented on a 2.0L turbocharged direct injection and is conducted for the future power of the passenger car or light-duty vehicle. The target of this study is to achieve clean, efficient, and high-power combustion performance simultaneously. The significant conclusions are listed as follows.

1. The effect of the turbocharger on the power performance is outstanding. Compared to the naturally aspirated hydrogen engine, a

Fig. 15. Working characteristic and NOx control performance of the hydrogen engine.

(a) NOx emissions before and after the SCR

(b) Space velocity and SCR temperature

Fig. 14. NOx emissions and the BMEP changes with the engine speeds.

- <span id="page-7-0"></span>peak power of 120 kW@4400 rpm and a maximum torque of 340 N⋅m @2000 rpm can be achieved with the matched turbocharger, increased by 123% and 195%, respectively. However, a high airflow rate range is required for a hydrogen engine, which is one time larger than a gasoline engine, while the small diameter turbo leads to the deterioration of the gas exchange and the declination of the performance at high engine speeds.
- 2. In DI hydrogen engine, pre-ignition tends to occur at early injection timing (SOI = -180 ◦CA) and high engine speeds (*>*3000 rpm), whereas knock tends to happen with late injection (later than SOI = -160 ◦CA) and medium engine speeds (1500 rpm ~ 2500 rpm). Appropriate retarded injection can suppress the pre-ignition and enhance the maximum power limited by the abnormal combustion.
- 3. The highly efficient region (BTE exceeding 40%) overlaps the working area of BMEP *>* 8 bar. A maximum BTE of 42.6% can be obtained with a slightly lean λ of 1.91 @ 2000 rpm and 40.4% BTE with a λ of 2.47 @ 3000 rpm. Miller cycle by advanced intake and exhaust valve closing can achieve an approximately 1.8% increase in the BTE after the optimization.
- 4. At low speeds (below 2000 rpm), the high conversion efficiency drops to 90% at 4400 rpm due to the high-speed velocity. The incylinder NOx control occupied approximately half of the overall working characteristic, while the use of the after-treatment extended the region to two-thirds of the whole map. The hydrogen can achieve large power (BMEP = 17 bar), high brake thermal efficiency (BTE = 42.1%), and near-zero emissions (NOx 20 ppm) simultaneously with the use of the NH3-SCR after-treatment system.

## *CRediT authorship contribution statement*

**Ling-zhi Bao:** Investigation, Data curation, Writing – original draft. **Bai-gang Sun:** Conceptualization. **Qing-he Luo:** Writing – review & editing. **Jin-cheng Li:** Supervision. **Ding-chao Qian:** Methodology. **Heyang Ma:** Data curation. **Ying-jun Guo:** Visualization.

## **Declaration of Competing Interest**

The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: This work is supported by the General Research and Development Institute of China First Auto Works Corporation Limited and the Beijing Institute of Technology Research Fund Program for Young Scholars (2 2050205-XSQD-202103007).

## **Acknowledgments**

This work is supported by the General Research and Development Institute of China First Auto Works Corporation Limited and the Beijing Institute of Technology Research Fund Program for Young Scholars (2 2050205-XSQD-202103007) .

## **References**

[1] Abe JO, Popoola API, Ajenifuja E, Popoola OM. Hydrogen energy, economy and storage: Review and recommendation. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2019;44:15072–86. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2019.04.068>.

- [2] Verhelst S, Wallner T. Hydrogen-fueled internal combustion engines. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2009;35:490–527. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2009.08.001>.
- [3] Dimitriou P, Tsujimura T. A review of hydrogen as a compression ignition engine fuel. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2017;42:24470–86. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2017.07.232) [ijhydene.2017.07.232.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2017.07.232)
- [4] Verhelst S. Recent progress in the use of hydrogen as a fuel for internal combustion engines. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2014;39:1071–85. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2013.10.102) [ijhydene.2013.10.102.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2013.10.102)
- [5] Xu P, Ji C, Wang S, Cong X, Ma Z, Tang C, et al. Effects of direct water injection on engine performance in engine fueled with hydrogen at varied excess air ratios and spark timing. Fuel 2020;269:117209. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. fuel.2020.117209.
- [6] Shinde BJ, Karunamurthy K. Recent progress in hydrogen fuelled internal combustion engine (H2ICE) – A comprehensive outlook. Mater Today Proc 2022; 51:1568–79. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2021.10.378.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2021.10.378)
- [7] Kiesgen G, Klüting M, Bock C, Fischer H. The new 12-cylinder hydrogen engine in the 7 series: The H2 ICE age has begun. SAE Tech Pap 2006. [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/10.4271/2006-01-0431)  [10.4271/2006-01-0431](https://doi.org/10.4271/2006-01-0431).
- [8] Thomas Koch D, Sousa A, Bertram D. H2-Engine Operation with EGR Achieving High Power and High Efficiency Emission-Free Combustion. SAE Tech Pap Ser 2019;1. <https://doi.org/10.4271/2019-01-2178>.
- [9] Lee J, Lee K, Lee J, Anh B. High power performance with zero NOx emission in a hydrogen-fueled spark ignition engine by valve timing and lean boosting. Fuel 2014;128:381–9. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2014.03.010.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2014.03.010)
- [10] Wallner T, Nande AM, Naber JD. Study of basic injection configurations using a direct-injection hydrogen research engine. SAE Tech Pap 2009;2:1221–30. [https://](https://doi.org/10.4271/2009-01-1418)  [doi.org/10.4271/2009-01-1418.](https://doi.org/10.4271/2009-01-1418)
- [11] Wimmer A, Wallner T, Rigler J, Gerbig F. H2-Direct Injection A Highly Promising Combustion Concept Reprinted From : SI Combustion and Direct Injection SI Engine Technology. SAE Tech Pap 2005;2005-01–01.
- [12] Verhelst S, Demuynck J, Sierens R, Scarcelli R, Matthias NS, Wallner T. Update on the Progress of Hydrogen-Fueled Internal Combustion Engines. 2013. https://doi. org/10.1016/B978-0-444-56352-1.00016-7.
- [13] Tsujimura T, Suzuki Y. Development of a large-sized direct injection hydrogen engine for a stationary power generator. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2019;44: 11355–69. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2018.09.178.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2018.09.178)
- [14] Oikawa M, Kojiya Y, Sato R, Goma K, Takagi Y, Mihara Y. Effect of supercharging on improving thermal efficiency and modifying combustion characteristics in leanburn direct-injection near-zero-emission hydrogen engines. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2022;47:1319–27. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2021.10.061>.
- [15] Oikawa M, Takagi Y, Mihara Y, Kawahara N, Tomita E, Naitoh K. Attainment of High Thermal Efficiency and Near-zero Emissions by Optimizing Injected Spray Configuration in Direct Injection Hydrogen Engines. SAE Tech Pap 2019. [https://](https://doi.org/10.4271/2019-01-2306)  [doi.org/10.4271/2019-01-2306.](https://doi.org/10.4271/2019-01-2306)
- [16] Klepatz K, Rottengruber H, Zeilinga S, Koch D, Prümm W. Loss Analysis of a Direct-Injection Hydrogen Combustion Engine. SAE Tech Pap 2018 2018. [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/10.4271/2018-01-1686)  [10.4271/2018-01-1686.](https://doi.org/10.4271/2018-01-1686)
- [17] Yamane K. Hydrogen Fueled ICE, Successfully Overcoming Challenges through High Pressure Direct Injection Technologies: 40 Years of Japanese Hydrogen ICE Research and Development. SAE Tech Pap 2018 2018. [https://doi.org/10.4271/](https://doi.org/10.4271/2018-01-1145)  [2018-01-1145](https://doi.org/10.4271/2018-01-1145).
- [18] Kawamura A, Sato Y, Naganuma K, Yamane K, Takagi Y. Development project of a multi-cylinder DISI hydrogen ICE system for heavy duty vehicles. SAE Tech Pap 2010.<https://doi.org/10.4271/2010-01-2175>.
- [19] [A. Kufferath, E. Schünemann, Michael Krüger, et al. H2 ICE Powertrains for Future](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0016-2361(22)01559-9/optRT6s6xDKh7)  [On-Road Mobility. 42nd International Vienna Motor Symposium 2021.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0016-2361(22)01559-9/optRT6s6xDKh7)
- [20] [Luo Q-h, Hu J-B, Sun B-G, Liu F-S, Wang Xi, Li C, et al. Experimental investigation](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0016-2361(22)01559-9/h0100)  [of combustion characteristics and NOx emission of a turbocharged hydrogen](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0016-2361(22)01559-9/h0100)  [internal combustion engine. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2019;44\(11\):5573](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0016-2361(22)01559-9/h0100)–84.
- [21] [Wang Xi, Sun B-G, Luo Q-h, Bao L-Z, Su J-y, Liu J, et al. Visualization research on](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0016-2361(22)01559-9/h0105)  [hydrogen jet characteristics of an outward-opening injector for direct injection](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0016-2361(22)01559-9/h0105)  [hydrogen engines. Fuel 2020;280:118710.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0016-2361(22)01559-9/h0105)
- [22] Lohse-Busch H, Stutenberg K, Duoba M, Liu X, Elgowainy A, Wang M, et al. Technology Assessment of a Fuel Cell Vehicle: 2017 Toyota Mirai. US DOE -Energy Syst Div 2017;ANL/ESD-18.
- [23] Eberle U, Müller B, Von Helmolt R. Fuel cell electric vehicles and hydrogen infrastructure: status 2012. Energy Environ Sci 2012;5:8780–98. [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/10.1039/C2EE22596D) [10.1039/C2EE22596D](https://doi.org/10.1039/C2EE22596D).
- [24] [Bao L-Z, Sun B-G, Luo Q-h. Experimental investigation of the achieving methods](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0016-2361(22)01559-9/h0115) [and the working characteristics of a near-zero NOx emission turbocharged direct](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0016-2361(22)01559-9/h0115)[injection hydrogen engine. Fuel 2022;319:123746.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0016-2361(22)01559-9/h0115)