# 2012-01-0654

ABSTRACT

This paper presents a study of the performance of a 6
cylinder, spark ignited, port fuel injected, production engine
modified for hydrogen fueling. The engine modifications
include turbo-charging, multiple fuel injectors per port and
charge-dilution control techniques. Pumping losses are
reduced through ultra-lean burn and throttle-less operation
alongside high charge dilution ratio control achieved by twin
independent variable cam timing without external EGR.

Lean-burn combustion, engine out emissions and brake
thermal efficiency results are examined in detail. In
particular, low NO emissions and brake thermal efficiencies
near 38% are observed experimentally at the same operating
conditions. The former is explained in terms of the usual
thermal NOx
 pathway. Usage of throttle position, injection

timings and cam timings for avoiding preignition and knock
over the entire engine map are also discussed. Finally, first
law analyses of energy losses for varying cam timings,
varying manifold pressure and varying torque are presented
and used to suggest reasons for values of λ for optimal BTE
in each case.

INTRODUCTION
Although the literature regarding hydrogen-fueled
reciprocating engines extends several decades, opportunities
and motivation for improving the performance of hydrogen
internal combustion engines (H2ICE) persist. Such research
remains important alongside fuel cell technology, as H2ICEs
are in many cases capable of providing power at efficiencies
around 40% but at substantially lower cost per unit power [1,

2, 3] (Table 1). Furthermore, the similarities between the
gasoline engine and the H2ICE mean that both bi-fuel
operation and conversion of existing vehicles are possible [4].

Hydrogen brings both benefits and difficulties to
reciprocating combustion engine operation. Hydrogen
possesses a high laminar flame speed (Table 2), allowing
sufficiently fast burn in lean mixtures and thus giving rise to
two significant mechanisms for improving fuel economy at
partial load [12, 7]. First, the lower adiabatic combustion
temperatures under lean burn conditions result in less heat
transfer to the cylinder walls [13]. Second, the need for airintake
throttling is significantly reduced, alleviating pumping
losses associated with throttled operation in a traditional
gasoline engine. It should be noted that throttling is often
necessary to improve combustion stability and BTE at very
low loads [2, 5, 14].

While hydrogen is resistant to knock relative to gasoline [11]

it is susceptible to preignition; furthermore individual
preignition events will often trigger numerous subsequent
events [15]. Such uncontrolled combustion is traditionally
thought to be caused by hydrogen's low ignition energy being

triggered by hot spots in the cylinder such as carbon deposits,
exhaust valves or the spark plug [2, 16, 17]. Other research
has produced results implicating ongoing combustion in the
crevice volume or residual gas temperature as a source of
ignition [4, 18]. To achieve desired engine operation both of
these potential causes should be given due consideration [19].

These same potential ignition sources also render port-fueled
hydrogen engines vulnerable to backflash - essentially a case
of preignition during the period that the intake valves are

Performance of a Port Fuel Injected, Spark Ignition

Engine Optimised for Hydrogen Fuel

2012-01-0654

Published
04/16/2012

Peter A. Dennis, Robert J. Dingli, Payman Abbasi Atibeh, Harry C. Watson and Michael J. Brear
University of Melbourne

Glen Voice

Ford Motor Company of Australia

Copyright © 2012 SAE International
doi:10.4271/2012-01-0654

Downloaded from SAE International by University of British Columbia, Saturday, July 28, 2018
open and flow has commenced through the injectors. The
considerations above still apply, with the additional
availability of fuel injection phasing and duration, as well as
valve timings as control methods.

This paper presents performance data from a 4.0L, sixcylinder,
port-injected, hydrogen fueled engine operating
both naturally aspirated and turbocharged. Input variables
examined are compression ratio, valve timings, injection
duration and timing, throttling, spark timing and engine
speed. The competing demands of power, efficiency,
emissions minimisation and stable combustion are addressed
and their causes discussed.

EXPERIMENTAL APPARATUS AND
METHODS

Testing was conducted at the Advanced Centre for
Automotive Research and Testing (ACART) facility at the
University of Melbourne using a Titan T460 dynamometer
supplied by Horiba (Table 3).

A 4.0L I6 engine provided by the Ford Motor Company of
Australia was used for the experiments (Table 4). Variants of
this engine have powered some of Australia's most popular
vehicles. Its relatively large displacement makes ultra-lean
burn strategies providing sufficient torque more easily
attainable. Cam timings are quoted in this paper as intake/
exhaust; 0 correlates to the fully advanced and 60 to the fully
retarded valve timings listed in Table 4. Illustrations of the
pistons used for results presented in this paper can be found
in Figure 1.

Due to hydrogen's wide flammability limits and high flame
speed (Table 2), the project aimed to produce a power plant
that would be able to operate without significant exhaust
after-treatment under lean conditions. According to the
literature, and verified in experiments, this would require
operation in regions of λ > 2 in order to yield acceptable NOx

levels [20, 11], less than 180mg/km for the Euro 5 standard
[21]. Thus, to retain reasonable top-end power, some form of
boost is required. Accordingly, both naturally aspirated (NA)
and turbocharged (TC) variants were tested experimentally.

Table 3. Engine dynamometer facility

Table 1. Previously measured H2ICE efficiencies

Table 2. Hydrogen's physical properties [11]

Downloaded from SAE International by University of British Columbia, Saturday, July 28, 2018
Table 4. Ford 4.0L I6 specifications

Port fuel injection (PFI) and direct injection (DI) were both
considered for the research project. A PFI system was
selected for ease of application and the potential for lower
NOx
 levels under lean burn conditions due to decreased
charge stratification [4, 11]. PFI can also result in lower
unburnt hydrogen concentrations and higher efficiencies
under lean burn conditions due to improved air-fuel mixing
[22, 23, 24]. Unavoidable backflash was only encountered as
stoichiometric operating conditions were approached,
correlating with results obtained by Mahesh et al. [23] and
outside the desired operating range for the engine.

Hydrogen's relatively low volumetric energy content also
required consideration. To allow sufficient flow at highpower
operating points, two injectors were installed in each
intake manifold port (Figure 2). Two identical, independent
fuel rails (allowing differing fuel pressures) and control
systems allow both large-scale and small-scale control of the
hydrogen charge, akin to strategies undertaken by Natkin et

al. [25]. The high flow rates possible also allow for strategies
aiding prevention of backflash (intake manifold combustion)
at high-power operating points caused by preignition while
the intake valve is open.

(a). 10.3: 1NA/TC

(b). 14.5: 1TC
Figure 1. Pistons used in different engine builds

Figure 2. H2 Injector Configuration

Control of the engine was achieved through ECU intervention

via ATI's Vision software suite. Online manipulation of
intake manifold pressure (MAP)/throttle position (TP), cam
timing (independent intake and exhaust movement), charge
dilution ratio (λ), injection timing, and spark advance (θ)

Downloaded from SAE International by University of British Columbia, Saturday, July 28, 2018
were all utilised. Control of engine oil and water temperatures
was via the Horiba management system.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Due to the number of control and design variables, the first
results subsection addresses limits for stable engine operation
and outlines the influence on engine behaviour of individual
variables, as well as that of cam positioning and manifold air
pressure (achieved via throttle or boost) combined.
Subsequently, “Performance Data” presents detailed
efficiency and emissions results at key engine operating
points, fuel consumption over a simulated drive cycle and
finally analysis of thermal losses as functions of λ.

CONTROL VARIABLES AND
OPERATING SPACE

Ensuring Stable Combustion

In both the literature and our experiments, preignition
(ignition of the air-fuel mixture before the spark plug is fired)
at various stages in the engine cycle is a key limitation on
engine operation. In this paper, we divide this phenomenon

into two categories - ignition before intake valve closure
(IVC), thus igniting charge contained within the intake
manifold (termed “backflash”) and ignition after IVC but
before spark leading to abnormal features observable in a
pressure trace (termed “late preignition”). “Knock”, or
ignition of unburnt air-fuel mixture after combustion is
initiated but ahead of the flame front causing acoustic
oscillations, is a third type of undesirable combustion.

Two groups of operating points often led to backflash in
experiments - relatively rich conditions (λ < 1:35) and
relatively lean conditions (λ > 4) (Table 5). Backflash in

leaner conditions exhibited discrete backflash events in the
order of 2-5 events every 10 seconds. This could be explained

by the slow crevice combustion described by Verhelst et al.
[4]. In richer conditions backflash, once initiated, tended to
continue until fuel was withdrawn, suggesting self-sustaining
combustion within the intake manifold. The rich mode of
backflash could be triggered at slightly leaner conditions via
extreme cam timings (in particular an advanced intake cam)
or θ significantly away from MBT.

The literature suggests that backflash in hydrogen engines is
sensitive to injection duration and timing [4, 11]. At the
engine speeds used during these tests, injection durations
made up small proportions of the intake stroke, yielding little
response to flow rate variation (Figure 3). Injection timing
was seldom the sole cause of backflash in rich conditions, but
in lean conditions end of injection timings in the range of
280-300° BTDC were optimal, and 290° was used for most of

the experiments. Start of injection varies with engine speed
and fuel demand. Figure 3 illustrates this timing, as well as

the potential ranges for valve lifts and ignition timing
alongside a typical motoring pressure trace.

Table 5. Backflash occurrence summary

Figure 3. Ignition, injection and valve timing diagram

Knock was also encountered during during testing at high
loads, typically as λ approached 1.3. Preignition and
backflash events generally accompanied knock events. In the
absence of backflash events, knock was only repeatedly
observable with θ significantly greater than that for MBT
(minimum advance for Maximum Brake Torque), as found
by Natkin et al. [25]. These combined observations made it
clear that management of backflash conditions was the
primary concern for smooth engine operation.

Downloaded from SAE International by University of British Columbia, Saturday, July 28, 2018
Independent Cam Timings and Charge
Composition

Cam timings have values between 0 and 60 correlating to
valve timings in Table 4. Figure 4 shows the efficiency and
residual fraction surfaces for various independent cam

timings with no fuel flow, i.e. the engine being driven by the
dynamometer, as simulated by Gamma Technologies' GTSuite
software. The one-dimensional flow model used was
validated against results obtained from the 10.3:1NA engine
running on gasoline at WOT. Subsequently generated airflow
figures agreed well with experimental data from hydrogenfueled
operation across a range of λ values and cam timings
for both compression ratios.

Airflow curves for ultra-lean operating points are similar to
the non-firing case illustrated. Due to port injection of the
fuel however, they will be reduced by an amount proportional
to the volumetric flow rate of the hydrogen, which is up to
29% at stoichiometry [4, 8, 22]. The residual fractions vary
only weakly with λ, but as λ decreases the diluent effect of
the retained fraction will change in nature due to the
increased moisture and decreased oxygen content; residual
fractions can be expected to change significantly under
throttled operation. Figure 4a shows how throttle-free airflow
variation is achieved in the engine studied, resulting in large
variations in torque and BTE as the amount and quality of the
charge delivered to the engine changes.

For example, a useful performance comparison is to measure
torque deviation while maintaining constant fuel flow and
varying other inputs. When the efficiency response flattens
near the peak, this is analogous to a constant torque, constant
rpm (constant power) test point. Assuming MBT ignition

timing is found for each set of inputs, the remaining variable
is λ. As we are maintaining constant fuel flow λ modulation
is pivotal, and principally dependent on cam timings and
throttle angle. Thus, for each operating point of interest, we
may find a λ value and cam timings where the impediments

to efficient hydrogen combustion specific to richer operation
(heat dissipation [13]) and leaner operation (poorer flame
propagation leading to exhaust temperature and unburnt fuel
losses [25]) are at a combined minimum (see “First Law
Energy Analysis”). Furthermore, experimentation in both the
firing and non-firing cases showed that, where possible,
modulating the airflow using only the cam timings resulted in
reduced pumping work for the same airflow when compared
with throttle-assisted airflow.

(a). Volumetric efficiency (% air before throttle body) vs
cam timings

(b). Residual fraction (% mass at intake valve closure) vs
cam timings
Figure 4. 10.3:1NA Simulated airflow for independent
intake and exhaust cam variation at 1500rpm

Throttling Effects

Figure 5 displays the response of the 10.3:1NA build to
throttling at 3 fixed cam positions, showing increasing BTE
(Brake Thermal Efficiency) as airflow is increased. However,
it was observed that both increasing the compression ratio
and turbocharging caused the behaviour shown in Figure 6 - a

reduction in BTE at WOT (82°). This behaviour was
observed across a wide range of operating points.

Figure 6a was produced by resolving throttle position near
where the change in BTE is observed while maintaining a
constant λ of 2.7. As λ is constant, airflow variation may be
inferred from the fuel flow data. The inflection visible in the

BTE data occurs at a throttle angle of only 24°, a change of
just 3% in airflow but of near 85% in cross-sectional area
through the throttle body relative to WOT. This is believed to

Downloaded from SAE International by University of British Columbia, Saturday, July 28, 2018
be significant for the intake airflow fluid mechanics in the
configuration studied, and it is postulated that turbulence
created by the orifice flow assists both the homogenisation of
the air-fuel mix and in-cylinder flame propagation.
Supporting this supposition is Figure 6b, depicting torque
(and hence efficiency) sensitivity to spark timing at constant
λ. The WOT case shows a significantly greater requirement
for spark advance, consistent with the reduced flame
propagation rate in the absence of turbulence created by
throttling. Further experiments assisting charge homogeneity
at WOT by increasing injection duration by 50% while
maintaining constant fuel delivery (with corresponding fuel
rail pressures) influenced torque only weakly.

Figure 5. 10.3:1NA BTE vs λ at 1500rpm 83Nm, throttlegoverned(a).
Torque, fuel flow and BTE vs throttle positions at λ =
2.7
Figure 6. 14.5:1TC Throttle position effects near WOT
airflow at 1500rpm, Cams 30/30

(b). BTE vs θ for throttle positions 24° and 82°
Figure 6 (cont.). 14.5:1TC Throttle position effects near
WOT airflow at 1500rpm, Cams 30/30

While throttle-free idle operation was possible, partially
throttled operation (20-30% airflow reduction) was
appropriate at idle conditions for improved fuel consumption
and combustion stability. It is these results that are used for
the NEDC Efficiency section below.

Turbocharged Operation

In the conversion from a gasoline engine to a port-injected,
hydrogen-fueled engine, some compromises must be made on
performance - specifically, reductions in torque due to
reduced air filling and minimum λ values for efficient, lowemission
and stable operation. These may be offset through
the use of boost.

Turbocharger operation is routinely described in terms of
adjusted airflow. This is appropriate in an engine of nearconstant
λ, but for such engines we can expect proportional
fuel flow variation. In the hydrogen engine (where airflow
can change relatively little with torque), fuel flow is a more
appropriate indicator for expected turbine work, and thus
figures 7 and 8 depict the performance response to engine
speed and λ variation respectively. Turbocharged testing was
conducted with the wastegate fully closed.

Immediately apparent, and expected, is the relative boost
attainable at 3000rpm and above. Importantly, in contrast to
the 1500rpm results, the increase in boost as λ drops is more
than enough to overcome air displacement due to the portinjected
gaseous fuel, resulting in continued increase in
airflow. (Figure 8b shows airflow as volumetric efficiency
against λ excluding fuel and relative to pre-compressor air
conditions.) This leaves only the gap between λ = 1:35 and
stoichiometric combustion as a power limit compared to
naturally aspirated gasoline engines, aside from emissions
concerns addressed in “Emissions”.

Downloaded from SAE International by University of British Columbia, Saturday, July 28, 2018
Figure 7. 10.3:1TC Torque, boost and θ vs rpm, λ = 2,
Cams 30/30

(a). Torque and BTE vs λ

(b). Manifold absolute pressure and airflow vs λ
Figure 8. 10.3:1TC Turbocharged λ sweeps: 1500rpm
and 3000rpm, WOT, Cams 02\40

With the available boost increasing with engine speed, peak
power achievable in a lean-burn hydrogen engine should not
differ greatly from that for naturally aspirated gasoline,
provided there is suitable selection of the turbocharger. In
comparison to naturally aspirated H2 operation, increased
efficiency at higher load points is possible due to decreased
reliance on reducing λ to achieve desired torques. Optimal λ
values are further discussed in “Performance Data” below.

Further Notes on the Operating Space

Recessed-style spark plugs (Table 4) were installed in order
to accommodate the 14.5:1 compression ratio pistons.
However it was later discovered that low-load performance
was adversely impacted in these cases, particular at lower
torque operating points. When these plugs were replaced with
the original plugs using a modified mounting procedure, low

load behaviour more closely approximated that of the 10.3:1
engines. This suggests that although hydrogen is generally
easily ignited, under lean conditions ignition problems
comparable to those of hydrocarbon fuels may become
apparent.

Also, in order to avoid the influence of carbon deposits on the
cylinder walls from gasoline combustion, a number of the
engines were run-in on other gaseous fuels. Later analysis
revealed that significant variation in BTE correlated with the
operating history of the engines. The mechanisms at play are
not the focus of this paper and would benefit from further
work.

PERFORMANCE DATA

General Results
Figure 9 depicts BTE as a function of cam timings and MAP/
λ pairs to produce a torque of 120Nm at 1500rpm, similar to
Figure 5 for 83Nm. Figure 10 summarises the peak efficiency
points from Figure 9 and the equivalent data from tests at
83Nm/1500rpm and 170Nm/1800rpm. The tendency for BTE
improvement at lower airflows for the lower torque point, and

toward higher airflows at the higher torque point means that λ
for best efficiency varies only from 2.4 to 1.9 when the
torque more than doubles. This is in contrast to the constant
cam data in Figure 8a where λ varies from 2.3 to 4.0 to
achieve the same torque variation. The reduced variation in λ
at peak efficiency conditions in Figure 10 suggests that there
is a certain range of air-fuel ratios at which operation is most

efficient at these engine speeds in the engine studied.
Similarly in Figure 8a the peak efficiency region occurs when
1.9 ≲ λ ≲ 2.9. This λ dependence is especially important
when we consider emissions in the next section. Figure 11

further supports this conclusion, while the section “First Law
Energy Analysis” covers potential sources of this behaviour.

The data set for the 1800rpm/170Nm point is incomplete for
two reasons. At the 45\45 cam position, airflow was low

Downloaded from SAE International by University of British Columbia, Saturday, July 28, 2018
enough to restrict experimentation to a narrow range of λ
values, making it difficult to fully describe the efficiency
response. For the 02\02 and 02\17 positions backflash events
became an issue. At 02\17, only points close to WOT were
attainable; further restriction of airflow past 95% of the
maximum (λ from 2.16 to 2.07) yielded increasing frequency

of backflash. At 02\02 no backflash-free points were
achievable. Individual backflash events were observed at two
15\15 operating points but none at 15\30.

Figure 3 suggested that the injection timing most appropriate
for ultra-lean-burn operating points occurs quite close to the

valve opening events. This indicates that a large amount of
hydrogen-free airflow into the cylinder before injection is not
generally required for stable combustion. In fact, stable
combustion can occur injecting onto closed valves, and
instead it seems important to fully ingest all fuel before valve
closure.

However, in the case of an advanced intake cam (and in
particular where a similarly advanced exhaust cam inhibits
normal exhaust ejection) an amount of residual gas is ejected
into the intake manifold before being re-ingested into the
engine (Figure 12). Additionally at lower λ, the measured
exhaust temperature rises (from near 180°C at λ = 6 to 520°C
at λ = 1:5) and the residual temperature rises similarly. Given
the requirement for both advanced cam timing and low λ for

preignition at the 170Nm operating point, it is proposed that
residual gas around the injection point is causing the
preignition rather than cylinder wall temperature, wall
contaminants or similar. Closing the throttle generally

exacerbates the effect. More stable results may be achievable
by retarding the injection timing at advanced cam timings,
rather than the reverse.

Figure 9. 14.5:1TC BTE vs λ at 1500rpm/120Nm for a variety of cam positions

Figure 10. 14.5:1TC Comparison of performance at three operating points: λ at WOT, λ for peak BTE and BTE vs cam timings

Downloaded from SAE International by University of British Columbia, Saturday, July 28, 2018
Figure 12. GT-Suite simulation of flow through intake
valve 3 (cylinder 2) vs cam timings at 1500rpm: negative
values represent mass flow from the cylinder to the
intake manifold

Emissions

With H2 as a fuel, CO and HC emissions are a result only of
oil consumption, and the key regulated pollutant is therefore
NOx
. Due to oxygen's abundance in a lean-burn engine, and
the thermal NOx
 formation mechanism [26], the most
significant factor in pollutant management is in-cylinder
temperature. It is therefore unsurprising that NO levels are
worst at low λ operating points (Figure 13). Considering the
peak efficiency points in the data above show that a large
number of operating points will not be unduly affected by this
limitation.

Figure 11. 10.3:1TC λ and BTE for independent cam variation at 1500rpm/120Nm and 1800rpm/170Nm

Downloaded from SAE International by University of British Columbia, Saturday, July 28, 2018
(a). 10.3:1NA BTE, NO and θ vs λ at 83Nm, throttlegoverned(b).
14.5:1TC BTE, NO, Torque and θ vs λ at WOT.
Torque reaches 191Nm at λ = 1.6
Figure 13. NO, θ, BTE and torque vs λ at 1500rpm,
Cams 30/30

Where more power is required, emissions can be brought
back to an acceptable level by delaying combustion through
spark retardation. This is done at a cost to efficiency that
worsens as λ decreases (Figure 14). Peak efficiency
differences between the builds may be attributed to
turbocharging, chamber geometry and running in procedure
for the 14.5:1 variant, but NO variation between the results is
significant even correcting for torque differences and is a
result of higher in-cylinder temperatures.

Figure 14. Emissions vs θ at λ = 2, 1500rpm for
10.3:1NA and 14.5:1TC at WOT

NEDC Efficiency
The New European Driving Cycle (NEDC) is a standardised
test for fuel economy and emissions common to many
countries, including Australia. Figure 15 depicts results for

the 10.3:1NA engine for the complete (urban and extraurban)
NEDC cycle using idle fuel consumption rates for
decelerations. The overall BTE of 28.4% corresponds to a
fuel consumption of 23g/km of H2, which is equivalent to
8.5L/100km of a typical gasoline. The equivalent 4-speed
automatic gasoline vehicle achieves 10.9L/100km under cold
start conditions [27]. This difference of 22% is far more than
can be accounted for by cold start penalties, particularly when

considering the reduced cold start penalties for gaseous fuels
[28]. It's nonetheless important to note that the NEDC
measures vehicle performance, rather than that of the engine
directly. Hence, as the data shown in Figure 15 use the
gasoline vehicle's gear shift schedule as a basis for the six
representative points chosen, further efficiency improvements
could be made by designing a powertrain appropriate for a
hydrogen-fueled engine.

First Law Energy Analysis
Figures 16, 17, 18 depict the fractions of input fuel energy

that leave the 10.3:1TC engine for three sweeps intersecting
at the operating point defined by Cam 30\30, WOT, 1500rpm
and 120Nm, with λ ≈ 2:75. Data from the 14.5:1TC build are
consistent with these results. The “Brake Work” fraction is
measured and is equal to BTE. The “Exhaust” fraction,
calculated from temperature measurements outside the
exhaust port, represents the rise in enthalpy between the
ingested air-fuel mixture and the reaction products in the
exhaust assuming complete combustion. The “Residual”
fraction is anything not accounted for - this includes the heat
entering the coolant loop, heat losses directly from the engine
to the environment, as well as the enthalpy of combustion of
any H2 remaining in the exhaust.

Downloaded from SAE International by University of British Columbia, Saturday, July 28, 2018
Figure 16 shows how energy flow responds to throttlecontrolled
airflow at constant torque. Unlike the behaviour in
Figure 6a, at this operating point in this build the BTE
increases monotonically from 32.8% to 34.8%, while the
exhaust fraction generally rises and residual falls. Figure 16b
reveals a change in pumping work between the two points
equal to 2.6% BTE. Variation in pumping work is not
significant for the other sweeps.

At the same speed and load, Figure 17 shows that peak BTE
(34.9%) occurs at cam timings of 30\30 (λ = 2:8), away from
the leanest point at 10\10 (λ = 3). The exhaust fraction

however rises (while exhaust temperature falls and airflow
increases) near monotonically with λ. Similarly, the residual
energy fraction decreases as λ increases, which is expected as
exhaust temperature is an indicator of in-cylinder temperature

and therefore increased heat losses to cylinder walls and
valves.

With the cams now fixed at the 30\30 position for optimal
BTE at 120Nm and 1500rpm, Figure 18 depicts the energy
balance response to λ variation over a much wider range by
allowing torque to change. Peak BTE here is 37.4% at λ =
2.5, peak exhaust fraction is 35.6% at λ = 5.1 and minimum
residual fraction is 25.0% occurring at λ = 3.5.

In the leaner portion of the open-throttle, fixed-cam data,
unburned hydrogen should become a significant contributor
to the residual fraction. Tang et al. [5] observed up to 39%
unburned hydrogen at λ = 7.1, and up to 17% at λ = 6. Hence,

the effect of unburned fuel cannot be discounted. This,
combined with the increased significance of FMEP as the
brake torque drops, can explain how 43% of the output torque
is rapidly lost as λ goes from 4 to 5, and 97% from 4 to 6.

Under the same conditions, we can also expect burn durations
to increase - visible in increase in θ required for MBT. This
slower heat release should also contribute to the higher
exhaust fractions observed at high λ operation.

Figure 15. NEDC results summary

Figure 16. 10.3:1TC Energy balance, pumping work and exhaust temperature vs λ, 1500rpm, 120Nm, Cams 30/30, throttlegovernedDownloaded
from SAE International by University of British Columbia, Saturday, July 28, 2018
CONCLUSIONS
A production engine fitted with a gaseous fuel port injection
system, multiple piston designs and natural and turbocharged
aspiration was subject to dynamometer testing. Particular
attention was paid to control of λ and airflow via throttle and
valve timings to exploit hydrogen's combustion properties
across varied operating points. Brake efficiencies of near
38% were observed for both 10.3:1 and 14.5:1 engine builds.

Preignition causing backflash was observed in a number of
operating conditions. Advanced cam timing, overly advanced
or retarded ignition or mistimed injection all contributed to
backflash occurrence. Control strategies for valve, ignition
and injection timings to avoid this problem were discussed,
and with adjustment backflash-free operation was possible at
all required operating points. Knock was encountered at the
richest (λ ≈ 1.3) operating points but only in the presence of
either backflash or over-advanced ignition, and was not a
limiting factor.

Emissions of NO remained low for λ > 2 but increased
rapidly as λ → 1.3. However, peak efficiencies frequently
occur at λ > 2, and generating higher powers with enginespeed
and boost has the potential to achieve required
emissions targets without severely compromising engine
performance.

Sources of loss in the engines tested vary significantly with λ
along with some secondary effects. In particular, significant
improvements in BTE can be obtained via use of valve timing
to vary airflow, with optima for BTE generally observed at
1.9 ≲ λ ≲ 3 and the exact λ value varying with operating
point. At leaner conditions, exhaust losses reduce BTE whilst
in-engine heat losses dominate at richer conditions.

REFERENCES

1. Keller, J. and Lutz, A., “Hydrogen Fueled Engines in

Hybrid Vehicles,” SAE Technical Paper 2001-01-0546, 2001,
doi:10.4271/2001-01-0546.

2. Berckmüller, M., Rottengruber, H., Eder, A., Brehm, N. et
al., “Potentials of a Charged SI-Hydrogen Engine,” SAE
Technical Paper 2003-01-3210, 2003, doi:
10.4271/2003-01-3210.

3. Eichlseder, H., Wallner, T., Freymann, R., and Ringler, J.,

“The Potential of Hydrogen Internal Combustion Engines in a

Figure 17. 10.3:1TC Energy balance, λ and exhaust temperature vs cam timings, 1500rpm, 120Nm, WOT, Cams 00\00 to 60\60

Figure 18. 10.3:1NA Energy balance, torque and exhaust temperature vs λ, 1500rpm, WOT, Cams 30/30

Downloaded from SAE International by University of British Columbia, Saturday, July 28, 2018
Future Mobility Scenario,” SAE Technical Paper
2003-01-2267, 2003, doi:10.4271/2003-01-2267.
4. Verhelst, S., Sierens, R., and Verstraeten, S., “A Critical
Review of Experimental Research on Hydrogen Fueled SI
Engines,” SAE Technical Paper 2006-01-0430, 2006, doi:
10.4271/2006-01-0430.

5. Tang, X., Kabat, D., Natkin, R., Stockhausen, W. et al.,
“Ford P2000 Hydrogen Engine Dynamometer Development,”
SAE Technical Paper 2002-01-0242, 2002, doi:
10.4271/2002-01-0242.

6. Natkin, R., Denlinger, A., Younkins, M., Weimer, A. et
al., “Ford 6.8L Hydrogen IC Engine for the E-450 Shuttle
Van,” SAE Technical Paper 2007-01-4096, 2007, doi:
10.4271/2007-01-4096.

7. Nakajima, Y., Yamane, K., Shudo, T., Hiruma, M. et al.,
“Research and Development of a Hydrogen-Fueled Engine
for Hybrid Electric Vehicles,” SAE Technical Paper
2000-01-0993, 2000, doi:10.4271/2000-01-0993.
8. Lohse-Busch, H., Wallner, T., and Shidore, N.,
“Efficiency-Optimized Operating Strategy of a Supercharged
Hydrogen-Powered Four-Cylinder Engine for Hybrid
Environments,” SAE Technical Paper 2007-01-2046, 2007,
doi:10.4271/2007-01-2046.

9. Obermair, H., Scarcelli, R., and Wallner, T., “Efficiency
Improved Combustion System for Hydrogen Direct Injection
Operation,” SAE Technical Paper 2010-01-2170, 2010, doi:
10.4271/2010-01-2170.

10. Wallner, T., Matthias, N., and Scarcelli, R., “Influence of
injection strategy in a high-efficiency hydrogen direct
injection engine,” SAE Technical Paper 2011-01-2001, 2011,
doi:10.4271/2011-01-2001.

11. Verhelst, S. and Wallner, T.. Hydrogen-fueled internal
combustion engines. Progress in Energy and Combustion
Science, 35:490-527, 2009.

12. Heffel, J., Johnson, D., and Shelby, C., “Hydrogen
Powered Shelby Cobra: Vehicle Conversion,” SAE Technical
Paper 2001-01-2530, 2001, doi:10.4271/2001-01-2530.
13. Shudo, T. and Nabetani, S., “Analysis of Degree of
Constant Volume and Cooling Loss in a Hydrogen Fuelled SI
Engine,” SAE Technical Paper 2001-01-3561, 2001, doi:
10.4271/2001-01-3561.

14. Natkin, R., Tang, X., Whipple, K., Kabat, D. et al., “Ford
Hydrogen Engine Laboratory Testing Facility,” SAE
Technical Paper 2002-01-0241, 2002, doi:
10.4271/2002-01-0241.

15. Rosseel, E. and Sierens, R., “Knock Detection in a
Hydrogen Engine,” SAE Technical Paper 970039, 1997, doi:
10.4271/970039.

16. Stockhausen, W., Natkin, R., Kabat, D., Reams, L. et al.,
“Ford P2000 Hydrogen Engine Design and Vehicle

Development Program,” SAE Technical Paper 2002-01-0240,
2002, doi:10.4271/2002-01-0240.

17. Negurescu, N., Pana, C., Popa, M., and Soare, D.,
“Aspects Regarding the Combustion of Hydrogen in Spark
Ignition Engine,” SAE Technical Paper 2006-01-0651, 2006,
doi:10.4271/2006-01-0651.

18. Swain, M., Schade, G., and Swain, M., “Design and
Testing of a Dedicated Hydrogen-Fueled Engine,” SAE
Technical Paper 961077, 1996, doi: 10.4271/961077.
19. Verhelst, S. and Sierens, R., “Combustion Studies for
PFI Hydrogen IC Engines,” SAE Technical Paper
2007-01-3610, 2007, doi:10.4271/2007-01-3610.
20. Wallner, T., Nande, A., and Naber, J., “Evaluation of
Injector Location and Nozzle Design in a Direct-Injection
Hydrogen Research Engine,” SAE Technical Paper
2008-01-1785, 2008, doi:10.4271/2008-01-1785.
21. Delphi. Worldwide emissions standards, passenger cars
& light duty trucks, 2009.

22. Ohira, T., Nakagawa, K., Yamane, K., Kawanabe, H. et
al., “Experimental Study of Emission Characteristics of a
Small Hydrogen S.I. Engine,” SAE Technical Paper
2007-32-0074, 2007.

23. Mahesh, M., Neelu, Prakash, C., and Viswanathan, G.,
“Review Of Fuel Induction Technologies for Automotive
Hydrogen Propulsion,” SAE Technical Paper 2005-26-350,
2005, doi:10.4271/2005-26-350.

24. Rottengruber, H., Berckmüller, M., Elsässer, G., Brehm,
N. et al., “Direct-Injection Hydrogen SI-Engine - Operation
Strategy and Power Density Potentials,” SAE Technical
Paper 2004-01-2927, 2004, doi:10.4271/2004-01-2927.
25. Natkin, R., Tang, X., Boyer, B., Oltmans, B. et al.,
“Hydrogen IC Engine Boosting Performance and NOx
Study,” SAE Technical Paper 2003-01-0631, 2003, doi:
10.4271/2003-01-0631.

26. Heywood, John B.. Internal Combustion Engine
Fundamentals. McGraw-Hill, 1988.

27. Federal Government of Australia. Green Vehicle Guide:
2005 Ford BF Falcon 4-speed auto. http://
www.greenvehicleguide.gov.au.

28. Watson, H.C.. Ford repositions LPG. Autoengineer, (43):
11-13, September 2011.

CONTACT INFORMATION
Assoc. Prof. Michael J. Brear
Dept. Mechanical Engineering
University of Melbourne
Parkville, 3010, VIC, Australia
Phone: +61 3 8344 6722
mjbrear@unimelb.edu.au

Downloaded from SAE International by University of British Columbia, Saturday, July 28, 2018
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was supported by the Advanced Centre for
Automotive Research and Testing (ACART, http://
www.acart.com.au). Much technical and mechanical advice
and assistance was supplied by Don Halpin.

The Engineering Meetings Board has approved this paper for publication. It has
successfully completed SAE's peer review process under the supervision of the session
organizer. This process requires a minimum of three (3) reviews by industry experts.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of SAE.
ISSN 0148-7191

Positions and opinions advanced in this paper are those of the author(s) and not
necessarily those of SAE. The author is solely responsible for the content of the paper.
SAE Customer Service:

Tel: 877-606-7323 (inside USA and Canada)
Tel: 724-776-4970 (outside USA)
Fax: 724-776-0790
Email: CustomerService@sae.org
SAE Web Address: http://www.sae.org
Printed in USA

Downloaded from SAE International by University of British Columbia, Saturday, July 28, 2018