# 2015-26-0051

INTRODUCTION

The conventional petroleum base fuels such as Gasoline and Diesel
are being used as a major source of fuels in transport vehicles. This
sector is facing a potential threat due to uncertainty and

interdependence of petroleum fuel availability and environmental
issues like air pollution, global warming etc. These issues can be
addressed to certain extent by use of alternate fuels. But most of the
alternate fuels are hydrocarbon based that emit CO2, which is a
Greenhouse gas (GHG), may be at a lower rate than conventional
fuels. Apart from CO2 emissions, other pollutants such as CO, HC &
NOx are emitted from the automobiles contribute to ambient air
pollution. In order to reduce the CO2 emission and ambient
emissions, various fuels have been considered as substitutes to the
conventional hydrocarbon based fuels.

The potential alternate fuels to replace them are mainly alcohols,
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG), Compressed Natural Gas (CNG),
and Hydrogen (H2), vegetable oils, bio gas, producer gas and
Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG). Among all alternate fuels, Hydrogen
(H2) can be considered as a unique alternate fuel as it is a carbon less
fuel and renewable fuel with capability to produce ultra-low

emissions. Hydrogen gas, the simplest element in the universe, is one
of the cleanest burning alternative fuel available and has the potential
to eliminate all carbon emissions. Hydrogen can be adapted to both
Spark Ignition (SI) engine and Compression Ignition (CI) engine. In
SI engines, hydrogen can be used as a sole fuel, but in the case of CI
engine dual fuelling technique can be adopted [2].

Since Hydrogen is a carbon free fuel, on burning hydrogen it will
produces only water as its product. Hence the formation of HC, CO
& CO2 during the combustion can be completely avoided; however a

An Experimental Study of Turbocharged Hydrogen Fuelled Internal
Combustion Engine

Srinivas Jilakara, Jaikumar V Vaithianathan, Saravanan Natarajan,
Venkateswara R Ramakrishnan, GP Subash, and Mathew Abraham
Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd

Jayakrishnan Krishnan Unni and Lalit Mohan Das
Indian Institute of Technology - Delhi

ABSTRACT

Hydrogen is considered as one of the potential alternate fuel and when compared to other alternate fuels like CNG, LPG, Ethanol etc.,
it has unique properties due to absence of carbon. In the current work, Hydrogen engine of 2.5 L, four cylinder, spark ignited
Turbocharged-Intercooled engine is developed for Mini Bus application. Multi-point fuel injection system is used for injecting the
hydrogen in the intake manifold. Initially, boost simulation is performed to select the optimum compression ratio and turbocharger. The
literature review has shown that in-order to get the minimum NOx emissions Hydrogen engines must be operated between equivalence
ratios ranging from 0.5 to 0.6. In the present study, full throttle performance is conducted mainly with the above equivalence ratio
range with minimum advance for Maximum Brake Torque (MBT) ignition timing. At each operating point, the performance, emissions
and combustion parameters are recorded and analyzed in detail. It has been observed that a power of 66.7 kW @3200 rpm and a torque
of 180 Nm @2000 rpm are achieved by using neat Hydrogen on Turbo charged engine. The base performance data is compared with
CNG naturally aspirated engine (running using stoichiometric operation) and it has been observed that Hydrogen engine is having
similar performance above 2000 rpm, however there is torque drop due to operation on Hydrogen which has limitation of the

turbocharger to boost at lower engine speeds (running using equivalence ratio ranging from 0.5 to 0.6). Such lean operation also helps
to avoid backfire which the hydrogen engine is quite vulnerable. It has also been observed that the combustion stability of the
Hydrogen engine is very good at all Indicated Mean Effective Pressure (IMEP) values irrespective of the engine speed with a
Coefficient of Variance (COV) around 1-2%.

Keywords: Hydrogen Engine, Combustion, Emissions, Performance, COV

CITATION: Jilakara, S., Vaithianathan, J., Natarajan, S., Ramakrishnan, V. et al., "An Experimental Study of Turbocharged Hydrogen
Fuelled Internal Combustion Engine," SAE Int. J. Engines 8(1):2015, doi:10.4271/2015-26-0051.

2015-26-0051
Published 01/14/2015

Copyright © 2015 SAE International and Copyright © SAEINDIA
doi:10.4271/2015-26-0051
saeeng.saejournals.org

314
trace amount of these compounds may be formed due to the partial
burning of lubricating oil in the combustion chamber. NOx is one of
the major pollutants in hydrogen operated SI and CI engines [2]. NOx
formed by the thermal dissociation and oxidation of nitrogen (N2) in
atmospheric air during combustion, is the only undesirable engine out
emission from a neat hydrogen propelled engine [3]. But coupling
this with unique characteristic of hydrogen, low lean-flammability
limit, which allows stable combustion even at highly diluted
condition [4], achieve near zero engine out emission.

Another characteristic of hydrogen is its tendency of pre-ignition and
backfiring [5]. It is observed that these issues can be tackled if the
proper selection of design parameters such as equivalence ratio,
compression ratio is determined for stable engine operation. Hence in
the current work, we chose to arrive at a best possible equivalence
ratio and compression ratio to develop a practical & stable hydrogen
engine which is targeted to be used on mini bus vehicle for
transportation. The study emphasis on the process of development
and on the testing of the hydrogen engine to understand the
performance, emission and combustion characteristics.

METHODOLOGY

The following methodology is used in the present work.

We have checked in the literature the best possible region of
equivalence ratio with which we can operate engine to get the
minimum NOx emissions. Initial simulation was done with AVL
boost simulation package to determine an optimum compression ratio
and turbocharger configuration.

Hydrogen engine operating strategy is to determine the optimum
equivalence ratio for minimal NOx emissions. Based on the optimum
simulation data, a four cylinder Hydrogen fuelled engine is
redesigned for Hydrogen from a base CNG engine.

Further, in this paper, emphasis is given on the hydrogen engine
testing to understand the performance, emission and combustion
characteristics.

HYDROGEN ENGINE OPERATING
STRATEGY

The main parameters which need to be considered while operating a
Hydrogen engine are performance and emissions. The Hydrogen
engine should give best possible performance with lowest NOx
emissions. Considering the learning from the previous work, if we
reduce the combustion chamber flame temperature or in-cylinder
thermal loading, NOx emissions from the Hydrogen engine reduces
[6]. At the same time, it also reduces the heat losses from the
combustion chamber walls, which will lead to increase in thermal
efficiency. Due to this, risk of backfiring and pre-ignition also reduces
as the reduction in combustion chamber temperature indirectly leads
to reduction in hotspots inside the combustion chamber. The flame
temperature can be reduced by using a very lean mixture.

To achieve lowest NOx emissions, we need to operate the engine in
the equivalence ratio ranging from 0.5 to 0.6 which can be observed
from Figure 1. At this equivalence ratio range, flame temperature gets
reduced and it will lead to reduction in NOx emissions [7]. Hence we
have decided to operate the engine in the above equivalence ratio
range which is a conventional qualitative method of governing. This
equivalence ratio range also reduces the risk of backfiring and
pre-ignition.

Figure 1. NOx Emission as a function of equivalence ratio for different
Compression ratio [7]

AVL BOOST MODEL PREPARATION FOR
HYDROGEN ENGINE

AVL Boost is one-dimensional gas exchange engine combustion
simulation software, which can predict performance at steady state
operating conditions. It can predict specific fuel consumption, power,
torque, and mean effective pressures at full throttle and steady state
operating conditions [8]. In the present study, AVL Boost is used to
simulate the performance of Hydrogen engine.

The Hydrogen engine specifications are mentioned in the Table 1.

Table 1. Hydrogen Engine Specification

Jilakara et al / SAE Int. J. Engines / Volume 8, Issue 1 (January 2015)

315
The first step of simulation task is to create an accurate engine model
which should consist of all the elements most similar to the existing
physical engine. Figure 2 represents the engine model used for the
current simulation.

Figure 2. Boost Simulation Model

AVL Boost enables a detailed simulation of entire engine including
the complete intake and exhaust system. Figure 2 shows the AVL
Boost simulation model of the 2.5 L Hydrogen engine.

Description of the Model

The air is aspirated from system boundary SB1 through the intake
snorkel pipe 1 to the air cleaner CL1. The cleaned air is sent to the
turbocharger compressor via the pipe 2. TC1 is the turbocharger, from
TC1 compressed air is sent to the intercooler CO1 via pipe 4. The
intercooled air is passed through the restrictor R1 (which is modeled
similar to the Throttle Body) to the intake manifold.

The intake manifold is split into two volumes. PL1 represents the
plenum volume and the pipes 9, 11, 13 and 15 represent the runners
for the cylinders C1 to C4 respectively. Pipes 10, 12, 14, 16 represent
the intake ports for the cylinders C1 to C4 respectively. Injectors I1 to
I4 are placed before the intake ports of the cylinders C1 to C4
respectively.

The exhaust ports are modeled in a similar way by the pipes 17, 18,
19 and 20. Before going into the exhaust manifold, the exhaust ports
17, 18 are connected to a common port 21 via junction J1 and the
ports 19, 20 are branched to a common port 22 via junction J2
respectively. The exhaust ports 21 and 22 are connected at the flanges
represented by restriction R2, R3 to the exhaust runner pipes 23 and
24 respectively. The exhaust runner pipes 23 and 24 are connected to
junction J3 and from there they are sent to the exhaust outlet flange
represented by restriction R4 through pipe 25. Exhaust gas enters into
the turbocharger through pipe 26.

Exhaust gas expands in the turbocharger TC1 and goes to the
catalytic converter CAT1 through pipe 5. From catalytic converter
CAT1, the exhaust goes to the plenum PL2 (which is modeled similar
to the silencer) through pipe 6. The exhaust goes finally let into
atmosphere from plenum PL2 to ambient - system boundary SB2
through tail pipe 3.

Details of the Combustion Model

For thermodynamic calculations, rate of heat release is needed to be
provided as input. The vibe function is often used to approximate the
actual heat release characteristic of the engine [8].

(1)

(2)

(3)

where,

Q is the Total Fuel Input

α is the crank angle

α0 is the start of combustion

Δαc

 is the Combustion duration

m is the shape parameter

a is the vibe parameter

The integral of the Vibe function gives the fraction of fuel mass
which was burned since the start of combustion [7].

(4)

where,

x is the mass fraction burned

In the current work, Vibe 2 zone combustion model is used. The
inputs for the Vibe 2 Zone combustion model are same as the Vibe
function. However instead of one mass averaged temperature, two
temperatures (burned and unburned zones) are calculated [9]. One
more advantage of using this model is that this model also predicts
the knocking characteristics of the engine, provided the actual heat
release is described properly by the vibe function specified [9].

Vibe parameter (a) is specified as 6.9 as the combustion is assumed as
complete combustion.

During our single cylinder hydrogen engine testing, pressure crank
angle histories are captured. Using the same experimental pressure
crank angle histories of our single cylinder hydrogen engine test data
and the other parameters of the Vibe i.e., duration of combustion,
shape parameter are calculated. Typical vibe parameters which are
from that analysis are indicated below for reference [6].

316

Jilakara et al / SAE Int. J. Engines / Volume 8, Issue 1 (January 2015)
During our previous work, a good correlation between the simulation
work and experimental data is shown and hence, in the current work
simulation is used to determine the compression ratio and

turbocharger configuration. As the validation of Boost simulation data
with respect to experimental data is already shown in our previous
work [6], hence in this paper more emphasis is given on the
experimental test data.

Table 2. Typical Vibe Parameters [6]

Details of the Engine Friction Model

Engine friction adversely affects the maximum work output and fuel
economy characteristics of an engine and directly accounts for much
of the difference in fuel consumption between cold and full-warm
engine operation [8]. For calculation of engine friction, the Shayler,
Leong, Murphy - Model is used which is available in the Boost
program. Based on the set of engine type and engine geometry related
input data, Boost program calculates the frictional mean effective
pressure (FMEP) of the engine and is provided as input to the
simulation.

Details of the Knock Model

The knock model available in the Boost calculates the minimum
octane number required for the engine operation free of knock [8].

The threshold for the onset of knock is exceeded if the integral [8].

(5)

where,

Tid is the ignition delay at the unburned zone's condition is larger than
one before the end of combustion is reached.

The ignition delay for the knock model depends on the octane
number of the fuel and the gas condition. The equation for ignition
delay is given below [8].

(6)

where,

Tid is the ignition delay in ms

ON octane number of the fuel

p is the pressure in atm

T is the temperature in K

A, a, n, B are the model constants

A = 17.68 ms

a = 3.402

n = 1.7

B = 3800 K

The approach for determining the model constants are by
experimentally running the engine at different knocking conditions
and obtaining the pressure crank angle histories at different
conditions for knocking combustion. Fine tuning the above
parameters in Boost case explorer in such a way that the predicted
pressure curves are matching with the experimental pressure curves.

Since there are no model constants are available for hydrogen fuel
and also no experimental cylinder pressure data with knocking
conditions, the model constants which are specified in the Boost
manual for the default condition are taken as the same for our
simulation work and are as mentioned above.

Details of the Heat Transfer Model

The heat transfer model used for the simulation is Woschini model
which is available in the Boost software and this model calculates the
heat transfer rates to the piston, cylinder head, and liner [8]. Wall
temperatures are provided as the input to the heat transfer model and
the wall temperatures of piston, cylinder head, liner at TDC and liner
at BDC are assumed as 585 K, 585 K, 585 K and 408 K respectively
which are taken from our single cylinder hydrogen work as they
provided a good correlation with the experimental work [6].

Details of the Species Model & Simulation Convergence
Criteria

Classic species transport model is used to provide the
thermodynamic properties.

The cycle calculation is done at a time step chosen automatically by
the Boost software based on the CFL (Courant, Fredrichs and Lewy)
stability criteria [8]. The cycle simulation is repeated till convergence
to IMEP with specified error value is achieved.

Details of the Turbocharger Model

Boost provides two methods to model a Turbocharger.

1. Simplified Model
2. Full Model

Simplified Model is meant for steady state performance. This model
provides further three modes for turbocharger simulation [8].

Jilakara et al / SAE Int. J. Engines / Volume 8, Issue 1 (January 2015)

317
a. Boost Pressure Calculation
b. Turbine layout calculation
c. Waste-gate calculation

Full Model is used in unsteady engine operation [8].

In the current simulation work, simplified model is used along with
the turbine layout calculation method to determine the turbocharger
configuration.

Determination of Optimum Compression Ratio and
Turbocharger Configuration using AVL Boost

Compression Ratio Determination

To determine the design feature of hydrogen engine, we need to
determine the compression ratio. The simulation work is used to
determine the compression ratio (CR) based on the Research Octane
number (RON) values at different compression ratios and different
speeds.

Simulation is done for different compression ratios ranging from 11:1
to 14:1 for the entire operating speed of the engine. It has been
observed that for 11 compression ratio for the entire speed range of
the engine, Research Octane Number (RON) value is in the range of
112 to 118. Similarly for 11.5 compression ratio - RON is in the range
of 115 to 121, for 12 compression ratio - RON is in the range of 121
to 127, for 12.5 compression ratio - RON is in the range of 125 to
134, for 13 compression ratio - RON is in the range of 125 to 134, for
13.5 compression ratio - RON is in the range of 129 to 138, for 14
compression ratio - RON is in the range of 132 to 142.

To avoid knocking, the value of the compression ratio should be
chosen in such a way that the obtained RON value should be below
the RON value of 130. Hence, based on RON data for the entire
range of engine speeds, a compression ratio of 12 meets the above
criteria and is chosen for the engine with hydrogen.

Determination of Turbocharger Configuration
The turbocharger configuration is selected by using the following
procedure. The required air mass flow rates and boost pressure are
calculated at all engine speeds using the following equations [9].

(7)

Where,

 is the required air flow rate in kg/s

AFR is the air fuel ratio

BMEP is the brake mean effective pressure in bar

BSFC is the brake specific fuel consumption in g/kW-h

N is the engine speed in rpm

Vd

 is the displacement volume in L

The required boost pressure is calculated by the below equation [9].

(8)

Where,

Pm is the inlet manifold pressure in bar

R is the gas constant of air in kJ/kg-K

Tm is the manifold temperature in deg K

ηv
 is the volumetric efficiency of the engine

After calculating the manifold boost pressure and air flow rates, the
required pressure ratio of the compressor is calculated by considering
the pressure drop across the intercooler and pressure drop across the
air filter.

Figure 3. Compressor Pressure Ratio Vs Volumetric Flow Rate

Figure 3 shows the calculated Compressor pressure ratio with respect
to volumetric flow rate of air. Using the calculated compressor
pressure ratio, utilizing the turbine layout calculation in boost, the
required size of the turbine is obtained. The calculated compressor
pressure ratios are plotted on available compressor maps and a
suitable compressor is selected. Similarly a suitable turbine is
selected.

DEVELOPMENT OF PHYSICAL HYDROGEN
ENGINE

The base engine used is a 4 cylinder CNG engine and further
development is done on the engine to run on Hydrogen fuel. The
details are as mentioned below.

318

Jilakara et al / SAE Int. J. Engines / Volume 8, Issue 1 (January 2015)
Fuel Injection System

Timed manifold injection system is developed in place of the single
point injection system. Various configurations of injection systems
are studied and multi-point injection system is finalized. Normally in
gasoline or CNG port injected engines, fuel can be injected before the
inlet valve opens as the chance of pre-ignition or back fire is very less
in those engines. But in a Hydrogen engine, injection of hydrogen
before the opening of inlet valve can lead to back fire or pre-ignition.
Hence, in our engine, hydrogen is injected after the inlet valve

opening and this will reduce the chance of back fire. The induction of
air initially will dilute the hot residual gases and cool hot spots if any.

Intake System

Same intake system of base CNG engine is used but instead of
mechanical throttle body of CNG engine, an electronic throttle body
is used to precisely control the air flow rate of the Hydrogen engine.
Runner type intake manifold is designed and replaced the existing
box type manifold of the CNG engine. The main reason for designing
the runner type intake manifold is to have uniform distribution of air
and to install the multi-point injection system of Hydrogen engine.

Compression Ratio

Based on the Boost simulation results, 12:1 compression ratio is
finalized for the Hydrogen engine.

Turbocharger

Based on the Boost simulation results, suitable turbocharger
configuration is selected.

Ignition System

Ignition system needs very low ignition energy to ignite Hydrogen
fuel when compared to other fuels like CNG. As excessive energy
can cause a hot spot on the spark plug electrode, which in turn will
lead to backfire. Inductive type smart ignition coils are used in our
application as they eliminate any residual voltage after the spark
delivery. This is very much required for the hydrogen engine as any
secondary unintended sparks caused due to residual voltage can lead
to back fire.

Spark Plug

Cold rated spark plugs should be used for Hydrogen application.
Platinum tips should not be used for Hydrogen application. A cold
rated spark plug transfers the heat from the tip of the electrode to the
cylinder head faster than the hot rated spark plugs which will reduce
the chance of back fire for a cold rated spark plug compared to a hot
rated spark plug which will reduce the chance of back fire for a cold
rated spark plug compared to a hot rated spark plug. Since platinum
acts as a catalyst causing the hydrogen to oxidize with air, hence
platinum tipped spark plugs should not be used. Hence, in our current
Hydrogen engine we have used cold rated Iridium tipped spark plugs.
Copper electrode can cause corrosion due to the water vapor

formation in Hydrogen engine and hence iridium tipped spark plugs
is chosen for our engine.

Lambda Sensor

Narrowband switching type lambda sensor of base CNG engine is
replaced with universal wideband oxygen sensor. As in our hydrogen
engine we are operating in the equivalence ratio range of 0.5 ∼ 0.6,
narrowband oxygen sensor can't be used. As a narrowband oxygen
sensor doesn't show the exact lambda value and it is widely used for
lambda values of one operation.

Using the above developments a Hydrogen engine is built and tested
for performance and emissions.

EXPERIMENTAL HYDROGEN ENGINE
TESTING

Test Setup and Procedure

Figure 4. Experimental Setup

Figure 4 shows the experimental setup used for the Hydrogen engine
testing. 12 Nos. of hydrogen cylinders are connected as a cascade and
gas is supplied to a common manifold at a pressure of 150 bar
(gauge). A pressure reduction valve reduces the 150 bar (gauge)
pressure to 15 bar (gauge). A mechanical shut-off valve is installed
between the common manifold and the pressure reduction valve to
manually shut-off the gas supply to the engine.

Further, pressure is reduced to 4.45 bar (gauge) using a low pressure
regulator. A low pressure solenoid is installed in the system which
gets activated when we power on the system and allow the gas to
flow further to the injection system. Low pressure solenoid is
basically used for the safety of the system such that the hydrogen
won't be flowing into the injection system during the power off
condition of the engine.

A mechanical pressure gauge is installed in the system to check the
actual pressure value during the engine testing. A flow meter is
installed in the low pressure line to measure the mass flow rate of
hydrogen. Flame arrester is used to arrest any fire which has

happened outside the engine. A multi-point fuel injection system is
used to supply the hydrogen fuel to the engine. ECU is programmed
with different maps and control strategies to run the hydrogen engine
at different operating conditions safely.

An eddy current dynamometer is used to load the hydrogen engine. A
MEXA-720 direct installation gas analyzer is used for NOx

measurement of the Hydrogen engine. An AVL Combustion pressure
indication system is connected to the Hydrogen engine to process,

Jilakara et al / SAE Int. J. Engines / Volume 8, Issue 1 (January 2015)

319
measure and analyze the cylinder pressure data. A direct mount type
pressure transducer is installed into the combustion chamber and it is
flush mounted in the combustion chamber. An optical encoder is
installed on the crankshaft to measure the TDC point. Cylinder
pressure data is measured along with TDC point using the cylinder
pressure transducer and the optical encoder. The combustion pressure
is analyzed and processed using the AVL Indicom combustion

software. The combustion pressure data is analyzed to determine the
Indicated Mean Effective Pressure (IMEP), peak pressure,

combustion duration, Ignition delay and coefficient of variation of
IMEP.

The coefficient of variation (COV) of IMEP for 100 consecutive
cycles is calculated by using the below equation [10].

(9)

(10)

(11)

Where,

COVIMEP is coefficient of variation of IMEP

n is the number of the cycle

σIMEP is the standard deviation of IMEP

µIMEP is the mean of IMEP

The heat release rate is calculated by the below equation [10].

(12)

where,

 is the heat release rate

γ is the ratio of specific heat

 is the rate of change of Volume

 is the rate of change of Pressure

In the present study, full throttle performance is conducted mainly
with the above determined equivalence ratio range with minimum
advance for Maximum Brake Torque (MBT). At each operating point
the performance, emissions and combustion parameters are recorded
and analyzed. The base performance data is compared with CNG

engine (running using stoichiometric operation). At each operating
point of the hydrogen engine, using the combustion pressure data the
parameters like Indicated Mean Effective Pressure (IMEP), peak
pressure, combustion duration, Ignition delay, heat release and
coefficient of variation (COV) of IMEP are calculated.

Results and Discussion

The base vehicle CNG engine specification is as mentioned below.

Table 3. CNG Engine Specification

Since the base vehicle used the above naturally aspirated CNG
engine, we have used the same CNG engine to compare the power
and torque of hydrogen engine. Hence, in the below discussion, we
have initially shown the comparison for performance between CNG
and Hydrogen engines and later more emphasis is shown on the
Hydrogen engine testing data.

Performance and Emission

The Base CNG Engine is a naturally aspirated engine which is
operated at Full throttle condition with Ignition timing maintained at
MBT timing running using the stoichiometric air fuel ratio. The
Hydrogen engine is turbocharged engine which is operated at Full
Throttle condition with MBT timing using an equivalence ratio of 0.6
up to 1800 rpm, equivalence ratio of 0.5 from 2000 rpm to 3600 rpm.

It has been observed that turbocharged Hydrogen engine produced a
power of 66.7kW at 3600 rpm and naturally aspirated CNG engine
produced a power of 52kW at 3600 rpm which can be seen from
Figure 5. Using Hydrogen fuel more power is achieved compared to
CNG as the boost pressure ratio obtained is around 2.4 at 3600 rpm
which can be observed from Figure 7 and also due to the boosted
operation of the Hydrogen engine.

However, below 2000 rpm, it has been observed that the power
achieved by the boosted Hydrogen engine is dropped compared to
naturally aspirated CNG engine which can be seen from Figure 5.
The power drop beyond 2000 rpm is due to low exhaust temperature
produced by the Hydrogen engine which can be seen from Figure 7.

The exhaust temperature obtained before turbine by hydrogen engine
at different speeds at full throttle condition is shown in Figure 7. The
maximum exhaust temperature obtained from boosted Hydrogen
operation is 873.16 K at 3600 rpm. But below 2000 rpm it has been

320

Jilakara et al / SAE Int. J. Engines / Volume 8, Issue 1 (January 2015)
observed that the exhaust temperature is 723.16 K which is not
sufficient to produce enough boost pressure ratio to increase the
power at lower speeds below 2000 rpm.

Figure 5. Speed Vs Torque of a Hydrogen Engine compared with a CNG
Engine

Similarly the Hydrogen engine torque with respect to the CNG
Engine Torque is shown in Figure 6. It has been observed that
Hydrogen engine produced a Torque of 180 Nm at 2000 rpm whereas
CNG Engine produced a torque of 175 Nm at 2000 rpm.

Figure 6. Speed Vs Power of a Hydrogen Engine compared with a CNG
Engine

Below 2000 rpm, it has been observed that the torque produced by
the boosted Hydrogen engine is less compared to naturally aspirated
CNG engine whose trend is similar to the drop in power at lower
speeds and this is due to low exhaust temperature of Hydrogen engine
at lower speeds which can be seen from Figure 7. However in the
vehicle, the actual torque delivered to the wheels at the lower speeds
is compensated by changing the gears and drive ratios. It is also
observed that the torque produced by Hydrogen engine above 2000
rpm is greater than the base engine and this is due to the boosted
operation of the Hydrogen engine.

Figure 7. Exhaust temperature Vs Speed of a Hydrogen Engine

The variation of boost pressure of the Hydrogen engine with respect
to mass flow rate of air which is shown in figure 8. It can be observed
that the boost pressure ratio obtained at rated speed is 2.4 due to
which more power is produced by Hydrogen engine.

Figure 8. Pressure ratio Vs Volumetric flow rate of a Hydrogen Engine

As it can be seen from the Figure 8, the boost pressure ratio obtained
at lower air flow rate of 0.025 m3
/s is 1.1 which is not sufficient to

produce very high torque and this trend is matching with the drop in
exhaust temperature shown in Figure 7.

Figure 9. Power Vs Equivalence Ratio at 1200 rpm

Jilakara et al / SAE Int. J. Engines / Volume 8, Issue 1 (January 2015)

321
To increase the power and torque at speed below 2000 rpm the engine
is operated with an equivalence ratio of 0.6. As it can be seen from
Figure 9 that the power can increase from 12kW to 14kW by
increasing the equivalence ratio from 0.5 to 0.6 at 1200 rpm. Hence
we have increased the equivalence at lower speeds to benefit from
increase in equivalence ratio to 0.6 as further increase in equivalence
ratio leads to increase in NOx emissions [7]. Also we have observed
in our testing that after equivalence ratio of 0.65 engine tends to
backfire.

Figure 10 shows the variation of Brake thermal efficiency with
respect to speed of the turbocharged Hydrogen engine. It is observed
that a maximum of 38% brake thermal efficiency is obtained at 2000
rpm. It is also observed the brake thermal efficiency obtained at all
speed ranges is above 30% for the Hydrogen engine. The reason for
this high thermal efficiency could be because of the faster combustion
which leads to reduced heat losses to combustion chamber walls.

Figure 10. Brake Thermal Efficiency Vs Speed of a Hydrogen Engine

The variation of NOx obtained with respect to speed is shown in
Figure 11. It has been observed that the NOx produced is around 500
ppm at rated speed and the NOx produced at lower speeds is in the
range of 100 ppm.

It can be observed that the NOx produced by the Hydrogen is very
low due to use of leaner equivalence ratio during the entire operating
range of the engine. Lean hydrogen engine operation leads to reduced
combustion chamber flame temperatures which causes the NOx
formation rates to become slow.

Figure 11. NOx emissions Vs Speed of a Hydrogen Engine

Combustion Analysis

The Cylinder Pressure (P) - Crank angle (θ) diagram for the

Hydrogen engine at Maximum torque speed of 2000 rpm is shown in
Figure 12. It has been observed that a peak pressure value of 67 bar is
obtained at 2000 rpm. It can be observed that the Hydrogen
combustion is faster from the rate of pressure rise curve shown in
Figure18. The maximum rate of pressure rise at 2000 rpm is 2.6 bar/
deg Crank angle (CA) which is shown in Figure 18.

The log P - log V variation for the Hydrogen engine at Maximum
torque speed of 2000 rpm is shown in Figure 13. It can be observed
from the log P - log V plot the start of combustion and the end of
combustion using the compression and expansion processes. It can
observed from the Figure 13 that the combustion duration for a
Hydrogen engine is very small and hydrogen engine burns faster.

Figure 12. P-Theta Diagram at Max. Torque speed of 2000 rpm

Figure 13. log P - log V at Max. Torque speed

322

Jilakara et al / SAE Int. J. Engines / Volume 8, Issue 1 (January 2015)
The heat release rate variation with respect to crank angle for the
Hydrogen engine at Maximum torque speed of 2000 rpm is shown in
Figure 14. It can be observed from that curve that the rate of heat
release in Hydrogen engine is very fast and all the heat is released in
180 CA duration at 2000 rpm. This faster heat release will obviously
lead to better thermal efficiency as the heat losses to the combustion
chamber will be lesser in Hydrogen engine due to the higher flame
velocity of hydrogen.

Figure 14. Heat Release rate Vs Crank Angle

The average peak pressure obtained from the Hydrogen engine at
different speeds is shown in Figure 15. It can be observed from that a
maximum of 98 bar peak firing pressure is obtained at 3600 rpm
speed. The higher peak firing pressure of 98 bar at high loads lead to
higher in-cylinder temperature which results in higher NOx values
and this can be observed from Figure 11.

Figure 15. Average Peak Pressure Vs Speed

The variation of Ignition delay and Combustion duration with respect
to speed are shown in Figure 16 and Figure 17. The Ignition delay is
calculated as the duration between the start of Ignition timing and
release of initial 5% of heat energy. The combustion duration is
calculated as the duration between the initial 5% of heat energy
release and 90% of heat energy release. It can be observed that the
Ignition delay is around 110 crank angle at 3600 rpm and combustion
duration is 300 crank angle at 3600 rpm.

Higher burning velocity of hydrogen compared to other hydrocarbon
fuels will lead to faster combustion in hydrogen engine. The same
trend has been observed in Figure 17 where the combustion duration
is observed to be below 300 CA for all the speed ranges.

Figure 16. Ignition Delay Vs Speed

Figure 17. Combustion Duration Vs Speed

It has also been observed that the combustion duration of a lean burn
Hydrogen engine is very much similar when compared with a
stoichiometric CNG engine [11].

Figure 18. Maximum rate of Pressure rise Vs Speed

Figure 18 shows the variation of maximum rate of pressure rise with
respect to speed. It can be observed that the maximum rate of
pressure rise is 3.2 bar/0
 CA at 3600 rpm. At mid-range of speeds the

Jilakara et al / SAE Int. J. Engines / Volume 8, Issue 1 (January 2015)

323
maximum rate of pressure is low and as the engine speed increases
the maximum rate of pressure rise increased at a very faster rate
leading to faster combustion.

Figure 19 shows the variation of Coefficient of variation (COV) in
Indicated Mean Effective Pressure (IMEP) with respect to speed. It
can be observed that for the Hydrogen engine the combustion
variation is very less and COV is below the value of 2% at all the
speeds. It can be observed from the COV value that the Cycle-byCycle
variations in combustion is very less for the Hydrogen engine
even though we are operating the Hydrogen engine at very lean
equivalence ratios.

Figure 19. COV in IMEP Vs Speed

The experimental analysis shows that complexity of combustion in
the hydrogen engine is mainly controlling the back fire and pre
ignition tendency of the fuel. While it was demonstrated that the
above factors can be controlled by selecting a combination of lean
equivalence ratio coupled with controlled compression ratio which is
substantially lower than the allowable limit as per hydrocarbon fuel
Octane number. Another factor is the control of NOx emission. All
the above factors have resulted in making the equivalence ratio to
lean limit of 0.5 to 0.6. Such lean operation is affecting the power and
torque rating of engine when compared to hydrocarbon fuel. Though
the boosting by normal waste-gate turbocharger is regaining the
power and torque, it is effective at the higher range of engine speeds
whereas at lower range of speeds the lower exhaust temperature
makes boosting ineffective and has shown lower torque values. This
may have to be addressed by making specific designs of supercharger
that can boost at lower speeds and independent of exhaust energy.

It is also seen that leaner operation is effectively managed in
hydrogen engine because of the wide flammability limits of the fuel
and due to the higher burning velocity of the hydrogen. This is
reflected in the combustion analysis of the engine. The duration even
at lean mixture is almost matching to stoichiometric combustion of
hydrocarbon fuels. The study could demonstrate the positive
advantages of hydrogen as a good fuel with no emission which makes
it an attractive option in the future.

CONCLUSIONS

The goal of this work is to develop a hydrogen engine for Mini bus
application and it has been achieved.

In-order to avoid back fire and to have optimum NOx level, an
equivalence ratio of 0.5 to 0.6 is observed to be the right option for
the Hydrogen engine. It has been observed that a compression ratio of
12:1 seems to give a safe operation of the Hydrogen engine. For the
target application, the loss of torque due to lean operation in

Hydrogen engine has to be compensated by turbocharging the engine,
which can give a better performance compared to naturally aspirated
CNG engine at higher loads.

It has been observed that the lower end torque of turbocharged
Hydrogen engine is dropping drastically as the turbo cannot sustain
energy requirement to provide required boosting due to low exhaust
temperature of exhaust. It has been observed that the rate of
combustion and Combustion duration of Hydrogen at lean

equivalence ratio seems to be almost matching with hydrocarbon fuel
at stoichiometric condition. It has also been observed that the
cycle-by-cycle variation in combustion is well below the accepted
limits for a hydrogen engine.

To summarize a Hydrogen fuel looks to be a good alternative fuel
with near zero emissions compared to all hydrocarbon fuels.

REFERENCES

1. Lee, J.T., Kim, Y. Y., and Caton, J. A., “The development of a dual
injection hydrogen fueled engine with high power and high efficiency”,
2002 Fall Technical Conference of ASME-ICED, 2002, 8-11 September,
2-12.

2. Verhelst, S., Verstraetran, S., and Sierens, R., “A comprehensive
overview of hydrogen engine design features”, Proceedings of the
Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part D: Journal of Automobile
Engineering 2007, Vol. 221(8), pp 911-920.

3. Das, L. M., “Hydrogen-Oxygen reaction Mechanism and its implication
to Hydrogen engine combustion”, Int. J. of H2 Energy, Vol. 21, pp. 703-
715, 1996.

4. Wan Jianlong, Fan Aiwu, Maruta Kaoru, Yao Hong and Liu
Wei, “Experimental and numerical investigation on combustion
characteristics of premixed hydrogen/air flame in a micro-combustor
with a bluff body”, International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, Vol. 37,
Issue 24, pp. 19190-19197, 2012.

5. Das L.M., Polly Milton, Vishal, “Performance Evaluation of Hydrogen
Fueled SI Engine Genset”, WHEC 16/13-16 June 2006.
6. kunal, R., Natarajan, S., Abraham, M., Subash, G. et al., “Effects of
Governing Parameters on the Performance and Emissions of Hydrogen
Engine for Automotive Application,” SAE Technical Paper 2013-01-
2891, 2013, doi:10.4271/2013-01-2891.

7. Das L.M., “Exhaust Emission characterization of Hydrogen Operated
Engine System: Nature of pollutants and their control techniques”,
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, Vol. 16, Issue 11, pp.765-775,
1991.

8. AVL BOOST Theory Manual, version 2010
9. AVL Boost User Guide, Version 2010.

10. Heywood John B,”Internal Combustion Engine Fundamentals”, McGraw
Hill Inc., 1988.

11. Jilakara Srinivas, “Performance, Emission, Combustion Characteristics
of a CNG Engine”, Mahindra Internal Calibration Report, 2014.

324

Jilakara et al / SAE Int. J. Engines / Volume 8, Issue 1 (January 2015)
CONTACT INFORMATION
Srinivas Jilakara

Fuels and Fluids Technology
AT & S Department
Mahindra Research Valley
Mahindra and Mahindra Limited
Plot No.41/1, Anjur Post
Mahindra World City
Chengalpattu-603204
Kancheepuram
Tamilnadu, India
Ph: +91-44-22168745
jilakara.srinivas@mahindra.com

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors want to acknowledge MNRE for funding this project. We
also want to acknowledge MNRE for their support and guidance
during the course of this project. We would like to thank IIT Delhi for
providing their test facilities to perform the engine testing activities.

NOMENCLATURE
MBT - Maximum Brake Torque
IMEP - Indicate Mean Effective Pressure
COV - Coefficient of Variance
SB - System Boundary
CL - Air Cleaner
TC - Turbocharger
CO - Intercooler
C - Cylinder
R - Restrictor
PL - Plenum Volume
I - Injector
MP - Measuring point
J - Junction

CAT - Catalytic Converter
E - Engine
CA - Crank Angle

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or
otherwise, without the prior written permission of SAE International.

Positions and opinions advanced in this paper are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of SAE International. The author is solely responsible for the content of the paper.

Jilakara et al / SAE Int. J. Engines / Volume 8, Issue 1 (January 2015)

325