# 2025-36. Volvo

Vienna
Motor
Symposium

2025

This paper has been presented and published on the occasion of the 46th International Vienna
Motor Symposium 2025.
All papers of this symposium are published in an anthology (ISBN 978-3-9504969-4-9) and can be
ordered from the Austrian Society of Automotive Engineers (https://vienna-motorsymposium.com,
email: info@oevk.at).
All rights reserved. It’s not allowed to reproduce any part of this document, in any form (printing,
photocopy, microfilm or another procedure) or to use electronic systems o duplicate or manipulate it,
without the explicit permission.

46th International Vienna Motor Symposium
14 - 16 May 2025

2025-36

A 17L LPDI H2 ICE Concept for the Very Heavy Applications by
Volvo Group – Update
Konzept eines 17L LPDI Wasserstoffverbrennungsmotors für
schwere Nutzfahrzeuge von Volvo Group
J. Wärnberg, J. Eismark, L. Andersson, O. Garnemark, A. Safari, F. Rahm,
Volvo Group Trucks Technology, Gothenburg / Malmö

2025-36

DOI: https://doi.org/10.62626/9yig-5mgy

Abstract

The Volvo group has committed to have a CO2 neutral product fleet offer by 2040. Important
pillars to achieve CO2 neutrality are the battery electric vehicles and the H2 fuel cell products,
but Volvo also recognises the need to keep combustion engines for certain applications, for
example operations with very high up-time and/or in very rough environments with high
payloads.

The development of a H2 engine demonstrator based on the present 780hp 17L diesel
platform will be presented in this paper. In the previous paper [1] the digital development
was described. Now the focus is to describe the results from testing of the demonstrator
engine. Key results include peak torque of 3000 Nm at 1000 rpm, maximum power
approaching 600 hp at 1600 rpm, peak brake efficiency exceeding 42% and the possibility
of engine -out emissions of NOx at approximate EuroVI tailpipe levels.

Furthermore, the potential of the Volvo Ultra Lean concept will be described and discussed
with the latest updates, including potential hybridisation.

Kurzfassung

Die Volvo Gruppe hat sich dazu verpflichtet bis Ende 2040 nur noch CO2 neutrale Produkte
anzubieten. Wichtige Säulen, um diese CO2 Neutralität zu erreichen sind Batterie und
Brennstoffzellenfahrzeuge, darüber hinaus sieht Volvo auch weiterhin den Bedarf von
Verbrennungsmotoren für Anwendungen mit hoher Auslastung und/oder extremen
Arbeitsbedingungen in Kombination mit hohen Lasten.

Diese Abhandlung beschreibt die Entwicklung eines H2-Prototypmotors auf Basis der 780PS
17L Dieselmotorplattform. Die vorherige Abhandlung aus dem Jahre 2023 beschrieb die
digitale Entwicklung. Der Fokus dieser Abhandlung sind die Testresultate des H2-
Prototypmotors. Zu den wichtigsten Resultaten zählen das maximale Drehmoment von
3000 Nm bei 1000 u/min und die maximale Leistung von 600 PS die bei 1600 u/min erreicht
wird. Der maximale Wirkungsgrad überschreitet 42%, trotzdem besteht die Möglichkeit von
Stickoxidrohemissionen auf dem Niveau von EuroVI.

Außerdem wird das Potenzial des besonderes mageren (Volvo Ultra Lean) Konzeptes
beschrieben, als auch das Potenzial von Hybridisierung.

46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025 1
Introduction

The Volvo group has committed to the Science Based Targets initiative (SBTi), [2] , and
therefore has set the goal to become CO2 neutral by 2040 (Figure 1). Important pillars to
achieve this are the battery electric medium and heavy-duty vehicles and heavy-duty H2 fuel
cell products, but Volvo also recognises the need to keep combustion engines for certain
applications, for example operations with very high up-time and/or in very rough
environments (Figure 2, [3]). Volvo trucks will release H2 ICE trucks before the end of the
decade [4].

Figure 1: Volvo group, the way to carbon neutrality

Figure 2: A Volvo 16L truck performing a heavy haul operation of a Volvo Wheel loader in a gravel
pit

The Volvo Group offers products, including trucks and buses and also off-highway products
ranging from boat engines through mining and construction equipment to off-grid power
generators. Many of these products are difficult to replace with alternative propulsion like
electric drivelines powered by batteries or fuel-cells so the combustion engine will still be
needed. Hydrogen is an alternative fuel, that also eliminates CO2 in the exhaust gas.

2 46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025
Volvo has a long history of evaluating alternative fuels, such as DME [5] and natural
gas/LNG. Now there is a recognition of the need for a hydrogen fuelled ICE to complement
the diesel/HVO and LNG offerings within traditional powertrains. A parallel track for
development of H2 ICE is Volvo’s involvement in the HYCET project [6], which aims to bring
hydrogen fuelled long-distance trucks into public road transport service for BMW Logistics
by 2025.

There are two main technologies, spark ignited (SI), pre-mixed engines either with port or
direct injection of fuel or diffusion combustion with Cespira HPDI technology (High Pressure
Direct Injections) [7]. Cespira is a joint venture between Volvo group and Westport fuel
systems. The Volvo group today offers LNG products with HPDI technology and is also
developing HPDI technology for hydrogen. The first truck product will use HPDI technology
[4].

However, recognizing the fact that a small amount of diesel or HVO is used to initiate
combustion with HPDI it is also interesting to keep developing CO2 free technologies.

Therefore, one such development track is the 16L LPDI (Low Pressure Direct Injection)
engine as was presented previously in Vienna [1]. In the meantime, the 16L base platform
has now been replaced by a 17L diesel engine with up to 780hp [8]. It was therefore natural
to base the prototype H2 engine on the new 17L engine. The prototype engine has been
running for most of 2024 in a test-cell within Volvo.

For the H2 SI engines, port and direct injection has been evaluated, with support from singlecylinder
engine experiments. The benefit of higher volumetric efficiency and therefore higher
power density directed the choice towards direct injection (LPDI). It does however drive the
need for substantial re-design of the cylinder head and requires an injector capable of
delivering the hydrogen gas directly into the cylinder while achieving a high level of
homogenisation to decrease risk for uncontrolled combustion (knock) and keeping NOXformation
low.

Because of the high laminar combustion velocity of hydrogen, measures need to be taken
to reduce the effect of this. The primary path is to run with very lean mixtures, not only does
this decrease combustion velocity and formation of NOX (lower combustion temperature) but
very lean operation also decreases the pumping losses otherwise associated with spark
ignition engines (mainly during stoichiometric operation). Setting the performance goals high
might require going from merely “lean” mixture to “Ultra Lean” as was shown by Porsche [9].

However, due to the lean operation an exhaust aftertreatment system (EATS) with selective
catalytic reduction (SCR) system similar to those on diesel vehicles will be needed.

This paper will focus on the results that were achieved with the demonstrator engine. The
engine (Figure 4) was built and run with a traditional dual-stage boosting system (Figure 3),
but the potential of a very advanced, possibly electrified, boosting system will also be

described. The latter would be capable of Ultra Lean operation including possibility to
achieve less NOX-emissions than the Euro 7 limits of less than 200 mg/kWh [10] during
transient operation in world harmonized transient cycle (WHTC).

46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025 3
Figure 3: A render of the 17L H2 engine, showing the dual-stage boosting system

Figure 4: The built 17L H2 engine at the time of preparation for testing
4 46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025
Engine development

When initiating the development of a hydrogen engine it was logical to evaluate the engine
platforms available inside the Volvo Group. With the clear interest to evaluate the ultimate
performance potential, it was logical to base this work on the Euro6 StepE,17L diesel engine,
recently released with 780 hp in diesel form [8]. From early single-cylinder testing, it became
clear that it would be beneficial not only to have the spark plug in the centre but also the
injector. This required a substantial re-design of the base cylinder head, involving changes
both to the coolant jacket and to the intake and exhaust ports. The resulting design placed
both injector and spark plug at slight angles towards the centre of the combustion chamber.
All the while keeping the existing valve train, including Volvo Compression Brake (VCB)
functionality.

The engine has been in testing during 2024 and below a summary of the results will be
presented. The first part will compare the predictions from simulations to the results from
actual testing. The second part will present the results more in-depth, both from a
combustion perspective and with regards to exhaust emissions. Finally, an update of the
potential of Ultra Lean will be given including hardware specifications.

Combustion system

The combustion system design is based on a 16L diesel engine design with tandem style

ports, see Figure 5. The packaging situation under the valve hood and in the cylinder-head
is difficult for the standard diesel engine. To fit yet another part, the spark plug, is challenging
due to the limited available space. In addition, both the positioning of the spark plug and
positioning of the injector are vital for the combustion system performance. The positioning
of the injector and the design of it does to a large extent govern the mixing process of fuel

and air. The spark plug is best situated in the centre of the cylinder to allow for a symmetrical
flame propagation. Hence, the initial design hypothesis for the combustion system was that
both the spark plug and the injector would benefit from being situated close to the cylinder
centre. The valves were adjusted in size and position to allow for centralised positioning of
the spark plug and injector. The result as seen from a combustion system point of view is
depicted in Figure 6 and Figure 7. As seen in the images neither the spark plug nor the
injector is situated in the absolute centre but the positioning is believed to be a good
compromise for both parts.

The geometry of the intake ports results in a very low in-cylinder gas motion, with both a
tumble and swirl ratio well below 0.5 at the spark timing window around TDC. This gives the
conditions at which the fuel-air mixing process will take place, i.e. the mixing cannot rely on
large scale gas motion but is dependent on a good injector and piston design.

46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025 5
Figure 5: CFD model of the 16L combustion system showing the internal geometry of the intake
and exhaust ports.

Figure 6: Combustion face of the cylinder head showing valves, injector position and spark plug
position.

Figure 7: Render of the 17L H2 cylinder head with injector, spark plug and H2 specific piston
6 46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025
Simulation – follow up

The previous paper [1] focused on simulation in 1D and 3D. Now, the validity of those
simulations can be verified and the models used to tune the precision further. Below is a
summary of that work including some key findings.

The 17L engine has been updated with a turbo-system capable of providing diesel-like
performance while meeting the H2 combustion requirements and the capability of running at
high lambda values. The performance evaluation performed with engine model in GT-suite
presented in the previous paper [1] showed that although with current hardware it should be

possible to achieve brake mean effective pressure (BMEP) of 25 bar (760 hp), the targeted
power for the current engine is 21 bar BMEP (620 hp). The built engine tested to obtain the
targeted torque curve. While testing is still going on, it is very beneficial to re-run the
simulation with the set up similar to the tests and compare the results with test. Such
comparison is a powerful tool for evaluating the performance and accuracy of the simulation
model and tuning and calibrating the model. Therefore, the simulation results will become
more predictive and reliable.

Results presented in the previous paper [1] includes the best efficiency points and therefore
include best points with exhaust gas recirculation (EGR). However, the tests were run
without EGR, therefore some new plots without EGR for the best efficiency points will be
presented first also. Results presented in the previous paper [1] includes the best efficiency
points and therefore include best points with exhaust gas recirculation (EGR). However, the
tests were run without EGR, therefore some new plots without EGR for the best efficiency
points will be presented first also. Gross Indicated mean effective pressure (IMEPg) values
of the highest measured load points during the engine testing are plotted in Figure 8 in
comparison to the highest gross IMEPg calculated from the 1D model with GT-suite.

Figure 8: Gross IMEP values (targeted torque curve an test results)

Figure 9 presents the brake efficiency estimation from the model without EGR for all full load
points in comparison to the base cases with EGR. Since the brake efficiency varies very
little (less than 0.5%) for the various lambda value, the results for highest lambda value are
plotted. Figure 9 shows that running the engine at full load without EGR reduced the brake
efficiency due to deteriorating the performance of the turbo system.

46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025 7
Figure 9: Highest brake efficiency estimation from engine model with and without EGR

In order to compare the capability of the engine model in estimating the engine performance,
at first step Three Pressure Analysis (TPA) were performed to tune the actual compression
ratio, valve lash values and global heat transfer coefficient. At the next step simulations were
done by controlling the model similar to tests. Therefore, test values for injected fuel mass,
boost pressure and 50% fuel burned crank angle were targeted in the simulations. The gross
IMEP (IMEPg) is not targeted in the simulation, so Figure 10 shows the comparison between
the test IMEPg and the Simulated values. The points that are presented in this plot includes
the highest power achieved at each engine speed along with the highest lambda value
during test.

Figure 10: IMEP gross values from test and simulation

Less than 3% of gross IMEP difference is obtained from test and simulation. All load points
have lower gross IMEP value in simulation compared to the tests. The reason for obtaining
less power from simulation in comparison to test could be explained by the increased value
of the exhaust manifold pressure in simulation in comparison to test (Figure 11). Higher
exhaust manifold obtained in simulation resulted in higher residual percentage within the
cylinder along with higher charge temperature. Therefore, in comparison to test, the fresh
air trapped mass and net IMEP (IMEPn) decreased while Pumping mean effective pressure
(PMEP) increased as presented in figure Figure 12.

8 46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025
Figure 11: Exhaust manifold pressure from test and simulation

Figure 12: IMEP net and PMEP values from test and simulation

Figure 13 presents the lambda value obtained from simulation in comparison to test. The
plotted lambda values are the apparent lambda and were obtained by the ratio of airflow to
fuel flow and the effect of residuals are not considered.

Figure 13: Apparent lambda from test and simulation

46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025 9
For almost all load points same lambda values are obtained from tests and simulations

except for 1400 and 1600 rpm. Such difference from test and simulation could be explained
by comparing the intake manifold pressure (representing boost pressure) plotted in Figure
14.

Figure 14: Intake manifold pressure from test and simulation

Figure 14 shows that although the boost pressures were targeted in the simulation, higher
boost pressures for load points at 1400 and 1600 rpm are estimated. These two load points
have very high power and the rack VGT (Variable geometry turbine) position is fully open.
However, still the targeted pressure is not obtained. The reason for such discrepancy arises
from different performance of the CAC (Charge air cooler) system in combination with the
low-pressure turbo system. Figure 15 shows the difference between the pressure after the
low-pressure (LP) compressor between test and simulation.

Figure 15: Pressure after the low-pressure compressor from test and simulation

Higher pressure value after low pressure compressor is obtained in test in comparison to
simulation. On the other hand, at very high load the air flow is high, however the CAC model
is not calibrated for such high flow values. Therefore, the flow condition cannot be fully
predicted after the CAC system. Boost pressure is targeted for controlling and adjusting of
the rack VGT position. Therefore, high-pressure turbo compensated for boost pressure by
closing and adjusting the rack VGT position and to obtain boost pressure similar to test.
However, since the rack VGT position is fully open in load points of 1400 and 1600 rpm,
lower pressures cannot be obtained by opening the rack VGT. Therefore, at these two load

10 46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025
points, lower boost pressure and higher lambda values are achieved. Figure 16 shows
pressure after high pressure (HP) compressor that is adjusted through the VGT system for
all load points expect 1400 and 1600 rpm load points.

Figure 16: Pressure after the high-pressure compressor from test and simulation

Figure 17 shows the brake efficiency of the test in comparison to simulation. The overall
heat transfer coefficient has a considerable effect on the obtained value from simulation.
This coefficient is considered to have constant value for all engine speed in simulation
however in reality it depends on the engine speed and to calibrate it based on engine speed
would provides even better estimation.

Figure 17: Brake efficiency from test and simulation

Figure 18 and Figure 19 show the high and lower pressure compressors efficiency maps
respectively.

46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025 11
Figure 18: High pressure compressor efficiency map from simulation

Figure 19: Low pressure compressor efficiency map from simulation

The results of simulation show that both compressors are working within good efficiency
regions. Since the presented load points are from higher loads values, results of turbo
system efficiency suggest that the size of turbo system for the current engine is good.

Conclusions from simulation results

By tuning the compression ratio, valve lash value and global heat transfer multiplier of the
engine model based on test results, the model can estimate the engine performance with
good accuracy. In the H2 engine and for high load, high lambda condition, very high boost
pressure and air mass flow is required. Therefore, some parts of the model (e.g. CAC
system) requires more calibration for such high flow conditions. Otherwise, the VGT system
can compensate in simulation and provide us with a performance that is not happening in
reality.

12 46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025
Results from testing: Combustion performance

With nine months of testing, a huge amount of data has been collected. Below the methods
of evaluation and some key results are presented.

Mixing and flame-propagation approach

In pre-mixed combustion, a sufficiently good mixing of hydrogen and air is required.
Sufficiently good mixing means that a certain level of homogeneity has been achieved and
that large scale vortices break down to small-scale turbulence during the compression
stroke. With these conditions fulfilled at the time of ignition, stable ignition and flamepropagation
can take place. Different approaches for good mixing are found in literature of
light-duty gasoline DI SI engines. Such engine concepts are often based on port-induced
air-tumble motion assisted mixing and vortex formation [11]. Swirl is another large-scale
port-induced air-motion that has been shown to assist mixing [12]. The fuel (liquid gasoline)
is in this case much heavier than the ambient cylinder gas, also in (partly) evaporated state.
However, fever examples of mixing in HD LPDI H2 ICE exist today. There is thus room for
exploring different methods. Using hydrogen, there are several fuel properties which impact
on the mixing in a different way compared to gasoline. Such parameters are density which
for hydrogen is extremely low, diffusivity which is much higher and fuel energy content per
mass which is much higher
as well.

The main research problem is thus to successfully mix a very light gaseous fuel with the
much heavier ambient gas.

The momentum and global kinetic energy in the injected fuel is lowered by the low density
and smaller needed amount of fuel mass but also compensated by the very high velocities
produced at critical flow conditions of an under-expanded hydrogen. In total, the momentum
of the injected fuel is lower than with a diesel-injection, but still significant.

In this work, Volvo designed the engine for a mixing-approach based on quiescent incylinder
ambient air. Mixing is induced using the momentum of the injected fuel. To focus
the momentum as much as possible, all fuel is concentrated to one single jet. The jet is
further focused using an injector jet-guiding cap. The jet-guiding cap is protruding 9 mm
below the firedeck. Mixing is also promoted by arranging for an as strong jet-piston
interaction as possible. The strong interaction is created by directing the single jet towards
the centre of the piston bowl. As a result of this geometrical setup, a toroidal vortex-system
(Figure 20) is formed which develops in a symmetrical manner during the compression
stroke [1].

The toroidal vortices act in a mainly axial-radial direction (like air-tumble) rather than
tangentially (as with swirl). Since the ambient air is quiescent, the fuel can more easily mix
by convection and diffusion and the complex turbulent toroidal vortices will interact and
break down to small scale turbulence. During the compression stroke, the toroidal vortices
develop while they gradually fill out the combustion chamber volume. Findings from internal
pre-study activities with such a mixing concept in a smaller single-cylinder engine showed
benefits by injecting the fuel as late as possible during the compression stroke. The latest
possible end of injection (EOI) is determined by the requirement to achieve critical flow
conditions. Critical flow occurs when the ratio between injection pressure and the cylinderpressure
is above two. The injection period is then phased towards the time interval when
the piston speed is high (Figure 21).

46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025 13
Figure 20: CFD Toroidal Vortex

Figure 21: Piston velocity (example). Upper plot showing a limit in end of injection related to the fuel
pressure/ cylinder pressure ratio required for critical flow. Lower plot shows piston velocity in m/s
during the compression stroke.

This arrangement results in a larger relative velocity between the downwards going jet and
the upwards going piston. The effect of jet-piston interaction (injection during compression)
seemed to override the importance of long time for mixing (injection during intake).

Also supporting this approach is interesting findings in [13] which suggest that higher incylinder
density during injection mitigates pre-ignition. Also supporting this approach is
interesting findings in [13] which suggest that higher in-cylinder density during injection
mitigates pre-ignition. At the time of ignition, it is important to avoid pre-ignition as well as
misfire or partial burn. Stable and efficient ignition rely on multiple parameters such as the

14 46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025
level of homogeneity, level of turbulent kinetic energy and mean velocities in the near vicinity
of the sparkplug itself. Stable and efficient ignition also relies on the physics of the spark
[14]. During the mixing process, the ignition and flame-propagation is thus intended to
develop in a symmetrical manner. The jet is ignited by a centrally located sparkplug allowing
the flame to propagate radially with about the same radial distance to the walls in all
directions.

Combustion system hardware

As described earlier in the section “Combustion system” (above) the in-cylinder air-motion
can be considered as quiescent. A slight Miller-effect is achieved using a valve-system with
inlet valve closure, IVC=545 at 0.2 mm lift. Main effect of interest is that closure of the inletvalve
thereby starts earlier which, under the condition to avoid injection during the air intake
phase, allows to use an earlier SOI. Earlier SOI might be needed to reach the high load
range (long injection duration). Injector and sparkplug are located in the region inside the
inlet and outlet valves. However, none of these components is situated exactly in the very
centre. The characteristics of the spark are controlled by a SEM capacitive ignition system
[14]. A compression ratio CR=10.5:1 aluminum piston has a wide piston bowl with shallow
sides. When the jet-bowl interactions start, the shallow sides lead the reflected flow upwards
towards the liner in a favorable direction to promote the formation of the before mentioned
toroidal vortex.

Evaluations methods

Evaluation is based on traditional averaged (slow) signals like speed, torque, H2 supplypressure
(Prail), nitrogen oxides (NOx) emissions, air-flow etc. Fast-sampled signals were
taken from each cylinder, mainly injector current, spark-plug primary current and cylinderpressure
(Pcyl). During part of the test-series, fast-sampled pressures in the inlet and
exhaust manifolds as well as fast sampled Prail were available. Fuel injection phasing was
defined by extracting start and end of injector energizing by analysis of the injector current
profile (SOE and EOE). Spark-timing (ST) was determined from the primary current signal
as first negative deviation from zero.

To enable comparisons with the combustion in other engines, gross indicated values were
used (integration during compression and expansion strokes). By that, differences in gasexchange
and mechanical friction were omitted. In each cylinder, 200 cycles were sampled
at 0.1 CAD rate. Using the pegged Pcyl curves, gross mean efficient pressure (IMEPg) and
indicated gross efficiency (IEFFg) were calculated.

From IMEPg, the global stability parameters coefficient of variation (COV), lowest
normalised value (LNV) were derived. LNV lower than 80% of the mean IMEPg was
considered as partial burn and LNV<0 as misfire. Pre-ignition was indicated if a single Pcylcurve
at ST exceeded the mean Pcyl at ST with more than 5%. The Pcyl was also used to
calculate maximum pressure gradient (dPcyl) and peak cylinder pressure (PCP). Finally,
knock tendency was assessed using the parameter max amplitude of pressure oscillations
(MAPO) here taken as the peak amplitude of the absolute values of a 4000 Hz highpassfiltered
cylinder pressure-curve.

46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025 15
Testplans

The main objective was to explore drivability and performance over the speed-load range.
Since the limits for stable operation for this LPDI prototype were not known before the tests
started, an iterative procedure was needed to gradually establish needed conditions for
stable operation. Tested engine settings were speed, injected fuel (load), lambda, injection
pressure, injection phasing and spark timing. When stable operation was concluded at a
certain load, the load was increased (longer fuel injection duration) initially with the same
settings as in the previous and lower load-point but then gradually adjusted to mitigate any
abnormal events or other limits occurring.

Engine test results

This section discusses the speed-load range, efficiency and abnormal combustion events.
Emissions are discussed in a separate section below. As shown in Figure 22, tested
operating points (OP) are mainly found within speed 1000-1600 rpm with maximum torque
reaching 3000 Nm.

Figure 22: Overview of speed-load operating points (OP)

The basic performance of the engine is illustrated in Figure 23 where efficiencies versus
variations of torque at different speeds are shown. Indicated gross efficiency (IEFFg), which
only reflects the integrated work ∫pdV during the compression and expansion strokes, shows
similar peak-values of 45% from low to about 80% load. In the highest load-range above
80% load,IEFFg slightly decreases. Brake efficiency, which also includes the gas-exchange
and mechanical friction, shows 40-42% above 1000 Nm with decreasing brake efficiency
when the load is decreased below 1000 Nm. Emissions of NOx were lower than 800 mg/kWh
through-out these tests.

Statistics of abnormal combustion events were in each OP related to the total number of
1200 recorded Pcyl-curves. The major part of the measurements reached IMEPg COV<2%
with IMEPg LNV > 90%. Generally, very few cases of misfires or partial-burn events were
observed. At the highest load range, when the combustion was indeed stressed, some
cases of pre-ignition occurred which lead to a sharp pressure gradient, high peak cylinder
pressures and knock. Cases of late-cycle end-gas ignition knock occurring without any
precedent pre-ignition were also registered.

16 46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025
Figure 23: Load-swings screening

In common for these abnormal events is their stochastic nature. This is illustrated in Figure
24 which shows a series of cycles where the mid plot cycle 96 is a cycle for which knock is
detected (MAPO=4.3 bar).

Figure 24: Typical series of cycles before, during and after a knocking combustion (mid plot)

Notable is that no relationship can be seen with the cycles just before, nor any effect on the
cycles just after cycle 96. Stochastic pre-ignitions were attributed to hot-spot ignition due to
leakage of carbon-containing particles. Stochastic low intensity late-cycle end-gas ignition
knock events were attributed to variation in mixture homogeneity due to the turbulent nature
of pre-mixed combustion. It can be observed that the knock-indication parameter MAPO is
sensitive. Rather small fluctuations of Pcyl can render quite high values. It is therefore
interesting to consider which levels of MAPO that should be deemed as critical. Following
the example from [15], hard knock limit was defined as speed [rpm]/1000.

Discussion and conclusions (combustion)

Even though these results are based on an early prototype and limited to only steady-state
operation, the results clearly demonstrate a good potential of an LPDI H2 ICE which is based
on a diesel engine with quiescent in-cylinder gas flow conditions. A rather high confidencelevel
for this conclusion is supported by previous studies using 1D-simulations, 3D

46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025 17
combustion CFD [1], experience from single-cylinder engine activities and literature which
lead to the tested engine design. The combined features of the evaluated jet-bowl toroidal
vortex mixing approach, single-jet based combustion system, dual-stage turbo-system and
the SEM ignition system achieved up to 3000 Nm torque, up to 42% in brake efficiency at
simultaneously low NOx-levels below 800 mg/kWh. At low to about 80% load, no significant
abnormal combustion events were observed. At even higher load, some pre-ignition and
knock events occurred, however at a low frequency.

Common for all operating points is that high levels of lambda>2.3 could be achieved. High
lambda mitigates pre-ignition and knock and results in low NOx. Moreover, the favorable
late injection strategy which takes place at higher in-cylinder density should also mitigate
pre-ignition [13]. Common for all operating points is that high levels of lambda>2.3 could be
achieved. High lambda mitigates pre-ignition and knock and results in low NOx. Moreover,
the favorable late injection strategy which takes place at higher in-cylinder density should
also mitigate pre-ignition. The observed frequency of abnormal combustion events at high
load was thus low. Of special interest is that these knock events typically occurred as sudden
stochastic single-cycle events rather than as a sequence of more and more severe abnormal
events. Stochastic poor mixing quality due to the highly turbulent nature of pre-mixed
hydrogen combustion could be one reason. However, secondary parameters which might
create hotspots should be a more likely reason. Such secondary parameters could be
stochastic existence of carbon-containing substance (lubricant, coolant) in the combustion
chamber through leakage (valves sealings, injector and sparkplug sleeve, injector pintle to

seat leakage), from reversed blow-by or caused by yet un-optimized piston ring-package
function. Potential cylinder-internal improvement areas could be to reduce dead-volumes,
smoothing of any sharp edges and improved cooling of hot components like the sparkplug
and the exhaust-valves.

It is crucial to obtain stable combustion in all conditions, over time and including transients.
However, it is a knowledge gap that knock acceptance criteria are not well established for
HD LPDI H2 ICE. To define acceptance criteria is thus an important research- and
development area.

18 46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025
Results from testing: Engine out emissions

With the lean concept chosen, the potential to achieve very low engine out emissions
(particularly NOX) can be achieved. Below a summary of engine out emission results are
described, including NOX, particulates and greenhouse gas emissions (CO2 and H2)

NOX emissions

This engine has a combustion system which seems to have very good mixing as was
predicted and exemplified in Figure 26 where the 17L is compared to an SCE with a lateral
injector position, the NOX formation rate differs more than a factor two at higher lambdas
between these two combustion concepts. The effect of the piston movement in the mixing
process can be seen in Figure 29 where a minimum in NOX formation is seen by injecting
during the first half of the compression stroke. Earlier injection with more time for mixing
does not give better mixing probably due to less interaction between piston and the gas jet.
The double stage turbo gives enough air to achieve higher lambda than 2.4 in almost all the
operation area which results in engine out emissions around the Euro VI levels or lower,
Figure 25. There is possibilities to come down to NOX levels below Euro VII by e.g. using
the VGT to higher lambda or by later combustion, but it comes with loss of efficiency as seen
in Figure 27 and Figure 28.With the 17L engine out NOX levels the requirement of NOX
conversion to comply with Euro VII will be around 80% as with the Euro V Diesel, indicating
that a EATS of EuroV specification (without oxidation catalyst) would suffice.

Figure 25: Brake specific NOX emissions and Brake specific efficiency as function engine power for a
wide range of speed and load

Figure 26: Engine out indicated specific NOX for (A) the 17 L engine with central injector and for (B)
a single cylinder engine with a lateral placed injector and fuel induced tumble IMEP 14 to 18 bar
and 50% Mean Fraction Burned 5 to 14 crank angles after top dead center.

46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025 19
Figure 27: Brake specific NOX emissions (o) and Brake specific efficiency (☐ ) as function relative air
fuel ratio (λ) at 1000 rpm and 1800 Nm and Mean Fraction Burned at 8⁰ after Top Dead Center.

Figure 28: Brake specific NOX emissions (o) and Brake specific efficiency (☐ ) as function crank angel
at 50% burned at 800 rpm and 1000 Nm and a relative air fuel ratio (λ) at 2.7.



Figure 29: Brake specific NOX emissions (o) and Brake specific efficiency (☐ ) as function of End of
injection at 1000 rpm and 1800 Nm and a relative air fuel ratio (λ) at 2.5, Mean fraction Burned at
CAD 8 deg.

Figure 30: Steady state exhaust temperatures as function of engine power

20 46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025
Hydrogen emissions

The hydrogen emissions (Figure 31) are quite low and lower than a tenth of the legal
requirement (40000 ppm in tailpipe). The hydrogen emission increases nearly linear with
lambda. At lower power where lambda is high to avoid throttling the unburnt hydrogen in the
exhaust can be in the range of 1-2 % of the fuel consumption (Figure 32). Unburnt hydrogen
can also be found in the crankcase gases and are mainly below 0.5% of the fuel
consumption. With a closed crankcase ventilation (CCV) this fuel can be circulated and used
in combustion. The efficiencies reported in the figures above are with a CCV.

Figure 31: Hydrogen concentration in exhaust as function of relative air fuel ratio (λ) at various
engine speed and torque, and ignition and injections timings

Figure 32: Relative fuel loss in exhaust and blowby as function of engine power.



Lubrication oil derived emissions

The level of carbon monoxide (CO) and hydrocarbons (HC) that are emitted from the
lubrication oil consumption (Figure 33) are below the Eurov VII legislation (1500 and 80
mg/kWh for CO and HC respectively). The level of carbon dioxide (CO2) is mainly below 0.5
g/kWh which was in the higher range from known oil consumption. Oil consumption can be
measured more easily with the H2 engine by measuring carbon content in the exhaust
stream, but it can also be confused with coolant leakage into the cylinder. The PN23 (the
number of particles larger than 23 nm) is around the range of the Euro VI legislation and
hence the PN10 is higher than the Euro VII legislation which means that a particle filter is
still needed. The main contribution to PN10 are particles in 15 nm size as seen in Figure
34Figure 34: Particle distribution at 1400 rpm and 14 bar IMEPg.. The PN10 is lower than
has been reported elsewhere and one explanation can be is the avoidance of gas jet directed
to the liner as shown by [16].

46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025 21
Figure 33: HC, CO and CO2 emissions as function of engine power.

Figure 34: Particle distribution at 1400 rpm and 14 bar IMEPg.

Greenhouse gas emissions

Although HC, CO and soot are well below regulatory limits, an oxidation catalyst may be

necessary to make the hydrogen engine a credible near-zero greenhouse gas emission
alternative. Greenhouse gas emissions are very low compared to today’s diesel, about 1%
calculated as GWP100 (Global warming potential, 100 years average), presented in Figure
35. GWP20 can be above 5% of the GHG (Greenhouse gas) emission of today’s diesel at
cruising power (Figure 36). The main source for the engine out GHG emissions is the
unburnt hydrogen in the exhaust, especially at low loads. Blowby gases can also be
substantial GHG emissions source if an open crankcase ventilation is used. GWP from [17]

22 46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025
Figure 35: 100 years average of Global warming potential from engine without aftertreatment as
function of engine power

Figure 36: 20 years average of Global warming potential from engine without aftertreatment as
function of engine power.

Conclusions from emission results

The engine out emissions are very low but still require an aftertreatment system. The
aftertreatment for Euro VII can though be simpler than the Euro VI diesel with an SCR plus
particulate filter. Since soot oxidation by NO2 is not needed, the particulate filter can be
placed after the SCR and catch particles from urea. Oxidation of hydrogen and unburnt
lube oil can be performed by using ammonia slip catalyst designed for hydrogen oxidation
also or by incorporate some oxidation catalyst in the particulate filter.

46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025 23
Volvo Ultra Lean

The definition that has been used for Volvo Ultra Lean in this paper means: a supported
LPDI H2 ICE engine with a pre-mixed, homogeneous, spark assisted combustion, limited
with a minimum lambda of 2.5 in full load and part load as well as for transient condition.

Background

For a LPDI H2 ICE it is common to aim for a lean combustion. The characteristics of
hydrogen fuel means that both NOX emissions and knock sensitivity will increase if lambda
is decreasing. Because of these characteristics for hydrogen fuel, it is common to aim for
lambda around 2.5. With a lambda of 2.5 the efficiency is high, and the level of knock, preignition
and NOX emissions are low. An adaptive approach, to the characteristics of the
hydrogen fuel, is to use Ultra Lean concept presented 2023 by Volvo in Vienna [1].
Therefore, the lower lambda limit is set to 2.5 and, if needed, one or more support systems
are added to fulfil the requirements for performance, given this lambda min limitation. By
doing this, we aim for high performance, high efficiency, increased robustness with almost
no emissions.

The Ultra Lean system will increase the knock margin and improve the robustness.

Given a good fuel mixture formation, the NOX emissions will be close to zero (Figure 37).

Figure 37: Schematic view of engine out NOX emissions versus lambda

Experimental testing

The results from the multi- cylinder testing of the 17L dual stage engine are very promising
showing both low emissions EO (engine out) in combination with a capability of Lean
Combustion, i.e. Lambda 2.3 and above at lower torque. Thanks to a VGT as HP turbine
with a fix geometry turbine as LP the setup was already present from the Volvo 16L engine,
and an aerodynamic rematch was performed to suit the H2 engine requirements. This has
also been considered a viable solution for a lean H2 ICE concept and was shown by Garrett
[18]. However, even if this seems to be a good solution for steady state performance, but

24 46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025
transients, high altitude operation and warm climate can be hard to achieve without knock
issues. The transient performance and boost margin in an air system may limit the capability
to supress knock that can occur extremely rapid. Post injections, to improve the response
from the turbo system, as described by Bosch in [19], can also be used if needed. Testing
and development are ongoing.

Air Handling System

Volvo Trucks have a long history of sector divided turbochargers starting with the Volvo
Viking in 1961 and continuing with the 13L EU6 Turbocompound engine [20]. The pulse
utilization together with lower backpressures results in better scavenging due to the isolation
of the 2 exhaust branches. For an H2 engine, the improved scavenging (reduced residuals)
is vital to avoid abnormal combustion. A SI engine, with its lower compression ratio
compared to CI engines, also has a larger volume in cylinder after the exhaust stroke,
resulting in higher residual fraction especially if the engine has a negative pressure ratio with
high back pressure. To achieve minimum residuals with the help of scavenging a positive
pressure ratio must be obtained across the cylinder. Thus, an engine with high pressure
EGR is not suitable- rather using air for NOX and knock control is more suited then. In
addition, for an H2 ICE with high lambda requirements, the exhaust backpressures will be
high even with a reduced EATS enabled by the low EO NOX and no HC and soot emissions.
Thus, an engine with traditional boosting system consisting of turbos (single or dual stage)
will operate with negative pressure ratios even with state-of-the-art components.

In the same manner how a turbocompound is suitable for an EGR engine concept [21] with
the compound turbine contributing to EGR drive, an additional compressor on the intake
side of an H2 engine can give both the additional boosting needed, and also enable positive
pressure ratio with good scavenging. Superchargers are traditionally either used for low
engine speed boosting to improve transient performance or for increasing power in high
performance engines over the full engine speed range. A traditional match was presented
by Eaton in Aachen [22] for a hydrogen SI ICE. This showed the previously known effects
of adding a blower to an ICE. In the same manner how a turbocompound is suitable for an
EGR engine concept [21] with the compound turbine contributing to EGR drive, an additional
compressor on the intake side of an H2 engine can give both the additional boosting needed,
and also enable positive pressure ratio with good scavenging.

Superchargers (SC) are traditionally either used for low engine speed boosting to improve
transient performance or for increasing power in high performance engines over the full
engine speed range. A traditional match was presented by Eaton in Aachen [22] for a
hydrogen SI ICE. This showed the previously known effects of adding a blower to an ICE.

However, the Volvo Ultra Lean concept has the potential to solve all the abovementioned
problems for a spark ignited H2 ICE with large improvements compared to a traditional setup
while minimizing the negative sides of mechanical boosting. The Ultra Lean engine concept
setup is schematically shown below (Figure 38).

46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025 25
Figure 38: The H2 Ultra Lean engine schematic

Simulations of a 13L LPDI H2 ICE Ultra Lean concept

Further evaluations have been performed in GT-suite simulations for the concept that
consist of a dual stage boosting solution with parallel dual LP e-turbos followed by an HP
compressor driven by the crankshaft. Here the result is positive pressure ratio over the
engine with high boost levels, high Lambda and a secured scavenging in all operating points.
In this stage, a 12.8 Liter engine simulation model for an LPDI concept was used as base
model. A camshaft with similar characteristics as the one used in the 17L engine test was
used, i.e. with an earlier intake valve closure (slight Miller, IVC 549). Compression Ratio was
increased in the second simulation round. The heat release rate model was based on a
Wiebe function matched to single cylinder H2 ICE test data for a wide range of lambda, IMEP
and engine speeds, all without EGR. Simulations were performed with combustion CA50 @
8deg after top dead centre (Atdc). A knock model was also used to monitor eventual knock
tendency.

The simulations performed are rather exhaustive to explore the potential fully. Therefore, a

meta model was tailored to the results to get part load mapped data as input for complete
vehicle simulations. 8 full load and 21 part load points, a total of 29 operating points between
800-1800rpm and up to 21 bar in BMEP were simulated (Figure 39).


Figure 39: The 29 operating points that were simulated, and engine torque curve with power

26 46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025
In the simulations sweeps of several air system actuators were performed resulting in 2300
cases/ point: Turbo-speed, VGT rack positions and SC gear ratio (GR); represents a SC
with variable GR, and e-turbos with capability to add energy for boost or to generate
electrical compound power.

Post processing of the data enables the study of the effect of different electric motor (EM)
power levels (limitations) for the e-turbos and different strategies for SC gearing, for example
fixed GR or even bypass solutions.

The concept enables very efficient scavenging with high lambda for the combustion,
separated exhaust branches with single entry bi-turbos, thus minimized back pressure, with
no detrimental effect in turbine efficiency at unequal admission (as for a single pulse divided
turbine). The e-turbos enable a harvesting of the energy which is vital since the engine has
a very high flow at Ultra Lean conditions. By this, energy from the crankshaft that is used for
boosting can be harvested back in the e-turbos after it has supported the combustion at
Ultra Lean conditions.

Turbo compressor (Figure 42) and variable geometry turbine with state-of-the-art efficiency
were chosen from other Volvo heavy duty engine projects.

For the HP compressor a roots type supercharger was chosen (Eaton R1900) since a
displacement compressor has several benefits in such an application (Figure 41).

Matching the supercharger displacement and gearing to the piston engine results in an
additional compression before the airflow is entering the inlet manifold. The linear behaviour
in turn enables having a fixed GR and constant engagement for the HP SC if a variable LP
stage is utilized (VGT in combination with EM). Higher GR result in higher pressure ratio in
the roots supercharger, which for the LP turbo compressor mimics a larger displacement
engine.

Figure 41: LP Turbo Compressor map (used x2) Figure 40: 1900cc HP Roots blower map

46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025 27
Simulation results

With the added energy flow paths in the system, efficiencies must be defined:
• Brake efficiency is the efficiency that comes from the crank shaft power. Therefore, it
always includes the SC power (Cost to drive the SC), pumping power and friction
power

• Net efficiency is defined as the efficiency that comes from the crank shaft power +
the E-shaft power (electrical power from e-biturbo shafts)
- Positive E-shaft power (produces power), Net efficiency > Brake efficiency
- Negative E-shaft power (consumes power), Net efficiency < Brake efficiency

The results shown below are optimized for best Net efficiency. A flat Net efficiency trend is
achieved (Figure 42) thanks to the compound energy from the e-turbos (E-shaft power).
Lambda is also flat relative to engine speed (Figure 43), enabling Ultra Lean conditions at
all loads. Up to 1100-1200 rpm the pumping power is positive (Figure 43).

Figure 42: Net efficiency, left and Brake efficiency, right

Figure 43: Lambda, left and Pumping power, right

The power diagrams (Figure 44, Figure 45) show that the compound power compensates
for the supercharger attachment power at higher engine speeds and loads which is the
reason for the flat net efficiency vs. engine speed.

28 46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025
Figure 44: Clockwise from top left: HP blower attachment power, E-shaft power, LP compressor
power and turbine power

Figure 45: E-shaft power + SC (attachment) power, left, SC (attachment) gear ratio, right

With the dual compression stages, the engine receives a positive pressure ratio, thus a
positive gas exchange loop is realized at lower engine speeds. In the PV-diagram (Figure
46) at 1000rpm full load the inlet manifold pressure is 3.8 bar and the exhaust manifold
pressure is 2.8 bar. This results in positive net work also in the gas exchange loop. The gas
exchange work is usually negative (without the HP compressor stage). The SOI is just at
IVC close to bottom dead centre.

46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025 29
Figure 46: PV diagram for a low-speed high load point: 1000rpm, 21Bar BMEP, GR 5.75
In the figures below (Figure 47, Figure 48) operating points for best Net efficiency are plotted
in the LP compressor and HP supercharger maps.

30 46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025
Figure 47: Compressor map for the LP stage, Best efficiency (solid line) and fixed GR 5.75 (dashed
line)

Figure 48: Compressor map for the HP stage supercharger, Best Efficiency (solid line), variable GR

To maximize engine system efficiency, the VGT is operating at low rack positions to extract
energy that is both driving the LP compressors and generates electricity in the Electric
Motors (generating) on the turbo shafts. For an optimization towards ~0 kW E-shaft power,
the net efficiency drops between ~1-4% points (equal to brake efficiency without any E- shaft
power). The efficiency drops most at high speeds and high load. This reflects a setup where
the Ultra Lean concept is without any e-turbos, instead using free- floating VGT turbos. The
E-shaft power can either be used directly in the vehicle or stored. If it is used directly, the
combined torque from the engine system (driveline) would be according to the left plot in
Figure 49, with a system combined peak power of 417 kW (343kW brake power) at 1800rpm.
74kW of this system combined peak power is electrical power.

46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025 31
Figure 49: System combined torque curve, left. System reduced torque curve, right.

Another option is to reduce the ICE brake torque curve with the E-shaft power according to
the right in Figure 49. This enables a further optimization of the engine at lower power levels.
Note that the system combined torque curve is still according to the classic Volvo 460hp
torque curve with constant torque line followed by a constant power line. This system has
peak power of 343kW like the original brake power (Volvo 460hp engine) but with a reduced
ICE brake power to about 300kW at 1500-1600 rpm. The E-shaft power fill in the gap from
the reduced torque curve up to the classic Volvo 460hp torque curve.

Air handling summary and conclusions

17L LPDI engine tests show that high lambda and very low emissions with stable
combustion is possible with a suitably matched Dual Stage Turbo system. VGT adds
flexibility and improves the width for the system.

Recent simulations of the Volvo LPDI H2 ICE Ultra Lean concept on 12.8L engine show
results with high engine efficiency over a wide speed range with a max combined Net
efficiency close to 45%. With good scavenging and high lambda, Volvo Ultra Lean concept
is robust with very low emissions engine out in combination with good margin to combustion
instabilities and excellent transient potential. The Volvo Ultra Lean concept can be tailored
with a further improved engine efficiency matched for lower BMEP with the help of the Eshaft
power for torque fill-in (LP turbo compounding), optimizing camshaft and CR.
Furthermore, the concept can be tailored to reflect a 560hp engine by using the E-shaft
power in a hybrid solution together with the ICE crankshaft torque according to the Volvo
460hp 21bar BMEP torque curve. The Volvo Ultra Lean concept can further be optimized
regarding system sizing and friction losses depending on the chosen application.

32 46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025
H2 ICE Ultra Lean with hybridisation

There are several alternative ways of implementing an Ultra Lean concept by using various
levels of electrification and supported boosting systems. A modular alternative for an Ultra
Lean LPDI H2 ICE engine can be an integration with a PHEV system (Plug-In Hybrid Electric
Vehicle). The P2, P2.5 or the P3 (Figure 50) systems are attractive combinations from a
modular and a complete system perspective. One important feature is the pure electrical
drive possibilities but also efficiency, performance, driveability, range and emissions will be
competitive when combined with a LPDI H2 ICE designed to be a part of a hybrid system.

Figure 50: Hybrid Topologies

The Ultra Lean LPDI H2 ICE is limited with a very lean lambda during transient operation.
The transient torque response from the engine will then be delayed by the dynamics of the
turbo system. In an Ultra Lean hybrid system, the electrical motor continuously supports the
LPDI H2 ICE engine by adding the torque deviation between the requested torque and the
actual crankshaft torque from the engine. The total output torque, or the sum of the torque
from the engine and the hybrid system, will then follow the requested torque. (Figure 51).

As a result, the lambda can be kept above 2.5. The system torque response will follow the
requested torque without delays, while NOX emissions are close to zero. For negative
transients, the use of throttling can be avoided. Since throttling can be avoided, the positive
differential pressure over the piston rings will reduce both hydrocarbon and particles
emissions originating from oil residuals. Instead of using the throttle, the negative torque
ramp can be controlled with the use of negative torque from the hybrid system. Therefore,
the system torque request can be fulfilled without the need for throttling. With a sophisticated
hybrid torque coordinator, the hybrid system can support the LPDI H2 ICE with torque assist,
both for positive and negative transients as described. Therefore, a substantial part of the
emission control can be performed by the hybrid system since most of the engine out
emissions can be avoided before they are produced.

46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025 33
Figure 51: Schematic view of torque coordination for a hybrid system

The hybrid system torque control strategy must be co-ordinated with a developed battery
SOC (State of Charge) strategy. Therefore, the torque assist must always be available to
actively support the engine with torque control for:
• Ultra Lean for low emissions
• Driveability
• Optimized efficiency
• Regenerative braking
• Engine brake performance
• Escape and limp home functions

When battery SOC level is high enough, there should also be support for:
• Pure electric drive
• Start/stop

• Torque and power boost “on demand” with combined ICE and Hybrid torque

Thanks to the torque assist from the hybrid system, the design requirements for the LPDI
H2 ICE engine can be re-balanced. For robustness, and consistent power delivery also with
a low battery SOC level, the LPDI H2 ICE in a hybrid installation should be designed for high
power output. Turbo matching and turbo system design should be optimized for high airflow,
high boost pressure and high efficiency but with less requirements for time-to-torque.
Therefore, a large and capable two stage turbo system can be used. Since the hybrid system
can compensate for the dynamic drawbacks of Miller cam timing, the compression ratio can
also be increased to improve the efficiency.

34 46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025
Conclusions for Ultra Lean with hybridisation:

Combining a LPDI H2 ICE Ultra Lean engine with a hybrid system is a very good match. The
unique possibility with the very lean pre-mixed spark ignited hydrogen combustion,
producing a very low amount of engine out NOX emissions, can be fully explored without the
drawbacks of slow torque response and low performance.

In a hybrid system, the LPDI H2 ICE can be optimized for high power and high efficiency by
using a 2-stage boosting system combined with Miller cam timing and increased
compression ratio.

The hybrid system will contribute to features like increased range, improved engine brake
performance and pure electric drive including escape and limp home function. Combining
the power from the hybrid system and the combustion engine, also for static use, will
increase the complete system performance to be very competitive.

Volvo 17L LPDI: Summary and outlook

This paper shows that a spark ignited hydrogen internal combustion engine with low
pressure direct injection can both be powerful, fuel efficient and release low nitrogen oxide
emissions. Keys to this achievement are the optimised combustion system (with centrally
placed fuel injector and spark plug) and a powerful boosting system that is able to keep incylinder
lambda at very lean levels (lambda >2.5) during steady state operation.

To ensure that the same lambda is kept during transient operation the application of an
electrified boosting system could be applied. While increasing system complexity and cost
it could improve driveability while always keeping emissions at very low levels.

Even though the engine is successful but obviously there are still improvements to be
found, like even better mixing to further supress risk of pre-ignition.

On top of that many factors are still to be defined, like acceptance levels for knock and
other combustions stability parameters.

46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025 35
Abbreviations

1D, 3D 1D-, 3D-dimensional
atdc After top dead centre
Battery SOC Battery state of charge
BMEP Brake mean efficient pressure
Brake efficiency Efficiency based on the power from crankshaft
CA / ° Crank angle, here -360° to 360° where TDC combustion=0°
CAC Charge air cooler
CA1090 Duration from 90 to 10 heat released
CA50 CA at 50% fuel
CCV Crank case ventilation
CFD Computational fluid dynamics
CR Compression ratio
DI Direct injection
DME Dimethyl ether
DST Dual stage turbo
DUR Duration (injection, combustion)
EM Electric machine

EOE End of energizing. Based on injector current signal.
EOI Actual end of injection
E- shaft power Electrical power from e-Turbo shafts
GHG Greenhouse gas
GR Gear ratio

Gross Compression and expansion strokes -180° to +180°
GWP Global warming potential
H2 ICE Hydrogen internal combustion engine
HP High pressure
HPDI High pressure direct injection
HVO Hydrogenated vegetable oil
ICE Internal combustion engine
IMEP Indicated mean effective pressure
IVC Intake valve closure
BMEP Brake mean effective pressure
PMEP Pumping mean effective pressure

Lambda Lambda based on fuel flow and fresh air-flow measurement
Lambda_exh Lambda based on exhaust composition
LNG Liquid natural gas

LP Low pressure (fuel injection), Low pressure (turbine)
LPDI Low pressure direct injection
Net Complete 4-stroke cycle -360 to 360°
Net efficiency Efficiency based on brake power+ E- shaft power
NOX Nitrogen oxides
OP Operation point
PHEV Plug-In Hybrid Electric Vehicle
PN Particle number

36 46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025
SBTi Science based target initiative
SC Super charger
SI Spark ignited

SOC Start of combustion (detected from in-cyl indication)
SOE Start of energizing. Based on injector current signal.
SOI Actual start of injection
ST Spark timing
TDC Top dead centre
UL Ultra lean
VCB Volvo compression brake
VGT Variable geometry turbine
WHTC World harmonized transient cycle

References

[1] J. Wärnberg, O. Garnemark, A. Safari, R. Ehleskog and H. Krishnamoorthy, “A H2 ICE
concept for the very heavy (FH16) applications by Volvo Group,” Vienna, 2023.
[2] “The Volvo Group commits to the Science Based Targets initiative,” 05 11 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.volvogroup.com/en/news-andmedia/news/2020/nov/news-3820494.html.
[Accessed 17 01 2023].
[3] V. Group, “Sustainable solutions,” 29 01 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://www.volvogroup.com/en/sustainable-transportation/sustainable-solutions.html.
[4] “Volvo to launch hydrogen-powered trucks,” 23 05 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://www.volvotrucks.com/en-en/news-stories/press-releases/2024/may/Volvo-tolaunch-hydrogen-powered-trucks.html.
[Accessed 29 01 2025].

[5] H. Salsing and I. Denbratt, “Performance of a Heavy Duty DME Diesel Engine - an
Experimental Study,” 2007.

[6] “KEYOU part of HyCET research project: Consortium promotes sustainable transport
logistics using hydrogen trucks,” 28 09 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://www.keyou.de/keyou-part-of-hycet-research-project-consortium-promotessustainable-transport-logistics-using-hydrogen-trucks%ef%bf%bc/.
[Accessed 28 12
2022].

[7] “HPDI H2,” [Online]. Available: https://cespira.com/our-technology/hpdi-h2/. [Accessed
29 01 2025].

[8] “The New Volvo FH16: More power - Less fuel,” 11 06 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://www.volvotrucks.com/en-en/news-stories/press-releases/2024/jun/the-newvolvo-fh16-more-power-less-fuel.html.
[Accessed 29 01 2025].

[9] V. Bevilacqua, A. Gallo and M. Böger, “Hydrogen Combustion Engine - High
Performance, No Emissions,” in Vienna Motor Symposium, Vienna, 2022.
[10] “Emission standards,” [Online]. Available:
https://dieselnet.com/standards/eu/hd.php#stds. [Accessed 29 01 2025].
[11] A. Helmantel, D. Dahl, F. Wemmert and M. Moren, “The New Volvo Mild Hybrid Miller
Engine,” MTZ, pp. 16-23, 04 2021.

46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025 37
[12] W. Schnittger, A. Königstein, S. Pritze, M. Pöpperl, P. Rothenberger and M. Samstag,
“2.2 Direct Ecotec New Engine with gasoline direct injection from Opel,” vol. 64, no.
12, 2003.

[13] R. Rajasegar, A. Srna, I. Barberry and R. Novella, “On the Phenomenolgy of Hot-Spot
Induced Pre-Ignition in a Direct-Injection Hydrogen Fueled Heavy-Duty, Optical
Engine,” Vols. 2023-32-0169, 2023.
[14] J. Ängeby, J. Wärnberg, M. Richter, Ö. Andersson and P. Tunestål, “Developing
Hydrogen Fueled SI-ICE for Heavy Duty Applications,” 2025.
[15] M. Bucherer, M. Reinbold, T. Bui and H. Kubach, “Mixture formation and corresponding
knock limits in a hydrogen direct injecction engine using different jet forming caps,” no.
2024-01-2113, 2024.

[16] A. Thawko, H. Yadav, A. Eyal, M. Shapiro and L. Tartakovsky, “Particle Emissions of
Direct Injection Internal Combustion Engine Fed with a Hydrogen-Rich Reformate,”
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 2019.
[17] D. Hauglustaine, F. Paulot and W. Collins, “Climate benefit of a future hydrogen
economy,” Commune Earth Environ, 2022.
[18] F. Akar, L. Jaeger, P. Pribyl and P. Davies, “Novel Boosting Solutions for the
Challenges of H2-ICE,” Graz, 2023.
[19] A. Kufferath, D. Naber, S. Bareiss, G. Cornetti, M. Krüger and H. Rösch, “The Synergy
between Operating Strategy, Hydrogen Injection System,” Vienna, 2024.
[20] “Green car congress,” [Online]. Available:
https://www.greencarcongress.com/2012/09/fh-20120906.html. [Accessed 31 01
2025].

[21] T. Callahan, D. Branyon, A. Forster, M. Ross and D. Simpson, “The Synergy between
Operating Strategy, Hydrogen Injection System,” 2012.
[22] E. SRL, “Supercharger boosting on H2 ICE for HEavy Duty applicatoin,” 2024.
[23] J. B. Heywood, Internal combustion engine fundamentals, McGraw-Hill, 1988.

38 46th International Vienna Motor Symposium 2025